docs/plugin-registry/platform/discord.md, before:

---
title: "Discord Plugin"
sidebarTitle: "Discord"
description: "Discord connector for Milaidy — bot integration, slash commands, voice support, and multi-server management."
---

The Discord plugin connects Milaidy agents to Discord as a bot, enabling message handling across servers, channels, and DMs with support for slash commands, reactions, and voice channels.

**Package:** `@elizaos/plugin-discord`

## Installation

```bash
milaidy plugins install discord
```

## Setup

### 1. Create a Discord Application

1. Go to [discord.com/developers/applications](https://discord.com/developers/applications)
2. Click "New Application" and give it a name
3. Navigate to **Bot** → **Add Bot**
4. Under **Token**, click **Reset Token** and copy the token
5. Under **Privileged Gateway Intents**, enable:
   - **Server Members Intent**
   - **Message Content Intent**
   - **Presence Intent**

### 2. Invite the Bot to Your Server

1. Navigate to **OAuth2 → URL Generator**
2. Select scopes: `bot`, `applications.commands`
3. Select permissions: `Send Messages`, `Read Message History`, `Add Reactions`, `Connect` (for voice)
4. Copy the generated URL and open it to invite the bot

### 3. Configure Milaidy

```json
{
  "connectors": {
    "discord": {
      "botToken": "YOUR_BOT_TOKEN"
    }
  }
}
```

Or via environment variable:

```bash
export DISCORD_BOT_TOKEN=YOUR_BOT_TOKEN
```

## Configuration

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| `botToken` | Yes | Discord bot token |
| `enabled` | No | Set `false` to disable (default: `true`) |
| `allowedChannels` | No | Array of channel IDs to respond in |
| `ignoredChannels` | No | Array of channel IDs to ignore |
| `prefix` | No | Command prefix (default: none, uses bot mentions) |

```json
{
  "connectors": {
    "discord": {
      "botToken": "YOUR_BOT_TOKEN",
      "allowedChannels": ["1234567890123456789"],
      "prefix": "!"
    }
  }
}
```

## Features

- **Message handling** — Responds to DMs and channel messages where the bot is mentioned or addressed by name
- **Slash commands** — Registers Discord slash commands for agent actions
- **Reactions** — Can add emoji reactions to messages
- **Threads** — Participates in thread conversations
- **Voice channels** — Can join voice channels (requires additional setup)
- **Multi-server** — Operates across multiple servers simultaneously
- **Role detection** — Reads member roles for permission-based responses

## Message Flow

```
Discord Message
       ↓
Plugin receives MESSAGE_CREATE event
       ↓
Determines if agent should respond:
  - DM → always respond
  - Channel → respond if mentioned or addressed
       ↓
Formats as Milaidy Memory
       ↓
AgentRuntime processes
       ↓
Response sent back to Discord channel/DM
```

## Auto-Enable

The plugin auto-enables when the `connectors.discord` block contains a `botToken`:

```json
{
  "connectors": {
    "discord": {
      "botToken": "YOUR_BOT_TOKEN"
    }
  }
}
```

## Environment Variables

The bot token can also be set via:

```bash
export DISCORD_BOT_TOKEN=YOUR_BOT_TOKEN
```

## Related

- [Telegram Plugin](/plugin-registry/platform/telegram) — Telegram bot integration
- [Slack Plugin](/plugin-registry/platform/slack) — Slack workspace integration
- [Connectors Guide](/guides/connectors) — General connector documentation

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/plugin-registry/platform/discord.md, after:

---
title: "Discord Plugin"
sidebarTitle: "Discord"
description: "Discord connector for Milady — bot integration, slash commands, voice support, and multi-server management."
---

The Discord plugin connects Milady agents to Discord as a bot, enabling message handling across servers, channels, and DMs with support for slash commands, reactions, and voice channels.

**Package:** `@elizaos/plugin-discord`

## Installation

```bash
milady plugins install discord
```

## Setup

### 1. Create a Discord Application

1. Go to [discord.com/developers/applications](https://discord.com/developers/applications)
2. Click "New Application" and give it a name
3. Navigate to **Bot** → **Add Bot**
4. Under **Token**, click **Reset Token** and copy the token
5. Under **Privileged Gateway Intents**, enable:
   - **Server Members Intent**
   - **Message Content Intent**
   - **Presence Intent**

### 2. Invite the Bot to Your Server

1. Navigate to **OAuth2 → URL Generator**
2. Select scopes: `bot`, `applications.commands`
3. Select permissions: `Send Messages`, `Read Message History`, `Add Reactions`, `Connect` (for voice)
4. Copy the generated URL and open it to invite the bot

### 3. Configure Milady

```json
{
  "connectors": {
    "discord": {
      "botToken": "YOUR_BOT_TOKEN"
    }
  }
}
```

Or via environment variable:

```bash
export DISCORD_BOT_TOKEN=YOUR_BOT_TOKEN
```

## Configuration

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| `botToken` | Yes | Discord bot token |
| `enabled` | No | Set `false` to disable (default: `true`) |
| `allowedChannels` | No | Array of channel IDs to respond in |
| `ignoredChannels` | No | Array of channel IDs to ignore |
| `prefix` | No | Command prefix (default: none, uses bot mentions) |

```json
{
  "connectors": {
    "discord": {
      "botToken": "YOUR_BOT_TOKEN",
      "allowedChannels": ["1234567890123456789"],
      "prefix": "!"
    }
  }
}
```

## Features

- **Message handling** — Responds to DMs and channel messages where the bot is mentioned or addressed by name
- **Slash commands** — Registers Discord slash commands for agent actions
- **Reactions** — Can add emoji reactions to messages
- **Threads** — Participates in thread conversations
- **Voice channels** — Can join voice channels (requires additional setup)
- **Multi-server** — Operates across multiple servers simultaneously
- **Role detection** — Reads member roles for permission-based responses

## Message Flow

```
Discord Message
       ↓
Plugin receives MESSAGE_CREATE event
       ↓
Determines if agent should respond:
  - DM → always respond
  - Channel → respond if mentioned or addressed
       ↓
Formats as Milady Memory
       ↓
AgentRuntime processes
       ↓
Response sent back to Discord channel/DM
```

## Auto-Enable

The plugin auto-enables when the `connectors.discord` block contains a `botToken`:

```json
{
  "connectors": {
    "discord": {
      "botToken": "YOUR_BOT_TOKEN"
    }
  }
}
```

## Environment Variables

The bot token can also be set via:

```bash
export DISCORD_BOT_TOKEN=YOUR_BOT_TOKEN
```

## Related

- [Telegram Plugin](/plugin-registry/platform/telegram) — Telegram bot integration
- [Slack Plugin](/plugin-registry/platform/slack) — Slack workspace integration
- [Connectors Guide](/guides/connectors) — General connector documentation
