docs/cli/configure.md, before:

---
title: "milaidy configure"
sidebarTitle: "configure"
description: "Display configuration guidance and common environment variables."
---

Print a configuration quick-reference to the terminal. The `configure` command is an informational guide -- it shows how to read config values, which environment variables to set for model providers, and where to edit the config file directly. It does not modify any files or settings.

## Usage

```bash
milaidy configure
```

## Options

`milaidy configure` takes no options beyond the standard global flags.

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--version`, `-v`, `-V` | Print the current Milaidy version and exit |
| `--help`, `-h` | Show help for this command |
| `--profile <name>` | Use a named configuration profile |
| `--dev` | Shorthand for `--profile dev` |

## Example

```bash
milaidy configure
```

## Output

Running `milaidy configure` prints the following information to the terminal:

```
Milady Configuration

Set values with:
  milady config get <key>     Read a config value
  Edit ~/.milady/milady.json directly for full control.

Common environment variables:
  ANTHROPIC_API_KEY    Anthropic (Claude)
  OPENAI_API_KEY       OpenAI (GPT)
  AI_GATEWAY_API_KEY   Vercel AI Gateway
  GOOGLE_API_KEY       Google (Gemini)
```

## Common Environment Variables

The following environment variables configure AI model provider access. Set them in your shell profile (e.g. `~/.zshrc` or `~/.bashrc`) or in a `.env` file in your working directory.

| Environment Variable | Provider |
|---------------------|----------|
| `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` | Anthropic (Claude) |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | OpenAI (GPT) |
| `AI_GATEWAY_API_KEY` | Vercel AI Gateway |
| `GOOGLE_API_KEY` | Google (Gemini) |

For a complete list of supported providers and their environment variables, see [milaidy models](/cli/models) and [Environment Variables](/cli/environment).

## Setting Configuration Values

`milaidy configure` is read-only. To actually change configuration, use one of these approaches:

**Read a value:**
```bash
milaidy config get gateway.port
milaidy config get agents.defaults.workspace
```

**Inspect all values:**
```bash
milaidy config show
milaidy config show --all      # include advanced fields
milaidy config show --json     # machine-readable output
```

**Find the config file:**
```bash
milaidy config path
# Output: /Users/you/.milady/milady.json
```

**Edit directly:**
```bash
# Open in your editor
$EDITOR ~/.milady/milady.json
```

## Related

- [milaidy config](/cli/config) -- read and inspect config values with `get`, `path`, and `show` subcommands
- [milaidy models](/cli/models) -- check which model providers are configured
- [milaidy setup](/cli/setup) -- initialize the config file and workspace
- [Environment Variables](/cli/environment) -- complete environment variable reference
- [Configuration Reference](/configuration) -- full config file schema and all available settings

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/cli/configure.md, after:

---
title: "milady configure"
sidebarTitle: "configure"
description: "Display configuration guidance and common environment variables."
---

Print a configuration quick-reference to the terminal. The `configure` command is an informational guide -- it shows how to read config values, which environment variables to set for model providers, and where to edit the config file directly. It does not modify any files or settings.

## Usage

```bash
milady configure
```

## Options

`milady configure` takes no options beyond the standard global flags.

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--version`, `-v`, `-V` | Print the current Milady version and exit |
| `--help`, `-h` | Show help for this command |
| `--profile <name>` | Use a named configuration profile |
| `--dev` | Shorthand for `--profile dev` |

## Example

```bash
milady configure
```

## Output

Running `milady configure` prints the following information to the terminal:

```
Milady Configuration

Set values with:
  milady config get <key>     Read a config value
  Edit ~/.milady/milady.json directly for full control.

Common environment variables:
  ANTHROPIC_API_KEY    Anthropic (Claude)
  OPENAI_API_KEY       OpenAI (GPT)
  AI_GATEWAY_API_KEY   Vercel AI Gateway
  GOOGLE_API_KEY       Google (Gemini)
```

## Common Environment Variables

The following environment variables configure AI model provider access. Set them in your shell profile (e.g. `~/.zshrc` or `~/.bashrc`) or in a `.env` file in your working directory.

| Environment Variable | Provider |
|---------------------|----------|
| `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` | Anthropic (Claude) |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | OpenAI (GPT) |
| `AI_GATEWAY_API_KEY` | Vercel AI Gateway |
| `GOOGLE_API_KEY` | Google (Gemini) |

For a complete list of supported providers and their environment variables, see [milady models](/cli/models) and [Environment Variables](/cli/environment).

## Setting Configuration Values

`milady configure` is read-only. To actually change configuration, use one of these approaches:

**Read a value:**
```bash
milady config get gateway.port
milady config get agents.defaults.workspace
```

**Inspect all values:**
```bash
milady config show
milady config show --all      # include advanced fields
milady config show --json     # machine-readable output
```

**Find the config file:**
```bash
milady config path
# Output: /Users/you/.milady/milady.json
```

**Edit directly:**
```bash
# Open in your editor
$EDITOR ~/.milady/milady.json
```

## Related

- [milady config](/cli/config) -- read and inspect config values with `get`, `path`, and `show` subcommands
- [milady models](/cli/models) -- check which model providers are configured
- [milady setup](/cli/setup) -- initialize the config file and workspace
- [Environment Variables](/cli/environment) -- complete environment variable reference
- [Configuration Reference](/configuration) -- full config file schema and all available settings
