docs/cli/models.md, before:

---
title: "milaidy models"
sidebarTitle: "models"
description: "Show configured model providers by checking environment variables."
---

Show the status of all supported AI model providers. The `models` command checks for the presence of each provider's API key environment variable and reports whether each provider is `configured` or `not set`. No API calls are made -- the check is purely local.

## Usage

```bash
milaidy models
```

## Options

`milaidy models` takes no options beyond the standard global flags.

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--version`, `-v`, `-V` | Print the current Milaidy version and exit |
| `--help`, `-h` | Show help for this command |
| `--profile <name>` | Use a named configuration profile |
| `--dev` | Shorthand for `--profile dev` |

## Example

```bash
milaidy models
```

## Output

```
[milady] Model providers:
  Anthropic (Claude): configured
  OpenAI (GPT): not set
  Vercel AI Gateway: not set
  Google (Gemini): not set
  Groq: not set
  xAI (Grok): not set
  OpenRouter: not set
  Ollama (local): not set
```

Each line shows `configured` if the corresponding environment variable is set and non-empty, or `not set` if it is absent or empty.

## Supported Providers

| Environment Variable | Provider | Notes |
|---------------------|----------|-------|
| `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` | Anthropic (Claude) | Claude 3 and 4 model families |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | OpenAI (GPT) | GPT-4o, GPT-4, and other OpenAI models |
| `AI_GATEWAY_API_KEY` | Vercel AI Gateway | Routes requests through the Vercel AI Gateway |
| `GOOGLE_API_KEY` | Google (Gemini) | Gemini model family |
| `GROQ_API_KEY` | Groq | Fast inference via Groq hardware |
| `XAI_API_KEY` | xAI (Grok) | Grok model family |
| `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` | OpenRouter | Unified API for many providers |
| `OLLAMA_BASE_URL` | Ollama (local) | Local models via Ollama (URL, not a key) |

## Setting Provider Keys

Set your API keys as environment variables in your shell profile or `.env` file:

```bash
# In ~/.zshrc or ~/.bashrc
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="sk-ant-..."
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."

# Reload your shell
source ~/.zshrc
```

Or set them inline when running Milaidy:

```bash
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="sk-ant-..." milaidy tui
```

## Selecting a Model at Runtime

Use the `--model` flag with `milaidy tui` to override the active model for a session:

```bash
milaidy tui --model anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
milaidy tui --model openai/gpt-4o
milaidy tui --model google/gemini-2.0-flash
```

Inside the TUI, use the `/model` slash command or press `Ctrl+P` to open the model selector overlay.

## Related

- [milaidy configure](/cli/configure) -- print provider key guidance to the terminal
- [milaidy tui](/cli/tui) -- start the TUI with a model override flag
- [Environment Variables](/cli/environment) -- complete environment variable reference
- [Model Providers](/model-providers) -- detailed provider configuration and model IDs

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/cli/models.md, after:

---
title: "milady models"
sidebarTitle: "models"
description: "Show configured model providers by checking environment variables."
---

Show the status of all supported AI model providers. The `models` command checks for the presence of each provider's API key environment variable and reports whether each provider is `configured` or `not set`. No API calls are made -- the check is purely local.

## Usage

```bash
milady models
```

## Options

`milady models` takes no options beyond the standard global flags.

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--version`, `-v`, `-V` | Print the current Milady version and exit |
| `--help`, `-h` | Show help for this command |
| `--profile <name>` | Use a named configuration profile |
| `--dev` | Shorthand for `--profile dev` |

## Example

```bash
milady models
```

## Output

```
[milady] Model providers:
  Anthropic (Claude): configured
  OpenAI (GPT): not set
  Vercel AI Gateway: not set
  Google (Gemini): not set
  Groq: not set
  xAI (Grok): not set
  OpenRouter: not set
  Ollama (local): not set
```

Each line shows `configured` if the corresponding environment variable is set and non-empty, or `not set` if it is absent or empty.

## Supported Providers

| Environment Variable | Provider | Notes |
|---------------------|----------|-------|
| `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` | Anthropic (Claude) | Claude 3 and 4 model families |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | OpenAI (GPT) | GPT-4o, GPT-4, and other OpenAI models |
| `AI_GATEWAY_API_KEY` | Vercel AI Gateway | Routes requests through the Vercel AI Gateway |
| `GOOGLE_API_KEY` | Google (Gemini) | Gemini model family |
| `GROQ_API_KEY` | Groq | Fast inference via Groq hardware |
| `XAI_API_KEY` | xAI (Grok) | Grok model family |
| `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` | OpenRouter | Unified API for many providers |
| `OLLAMA_BASE_URL` | Ollama (local) | Local models via Ollama (URL, not a key) |

## Setting Provider Keys

Set your API keys as environment variables in your shell profile or `.env` file:

```bash
# In ~/.zshrc or ~/.bashrc
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="sk-ant-..."
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."

# Reload your shell
source ~/.zshrc
```

Or set them inline when running Milady:

```bash
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="sk-ant-..." milady tui
```

## Selecting a Model at Runtime

Use the `--model` flag with `milady tui` to override the active model for a session:

```bash
milady tui --model anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
milady tui --model openai/gpt-4o
milady tui --model google/gemini-2.0-flash
```

Inside the TUI, use the `/model` slash command or press `Ctrl+P` to open the model selector overlay.

## Related

- [milady configure](/cli/configure) -- print provider key guidance to the terminal
- [milady tui](/cli/tui) -- start the TUI with a model override flag
- [Environment Variables](/cli/environment) -- complete environment variable reference
- [Model Providers](/model-providers) -- detailed provider configuration and model IDs
