docs/cli/overview.md, before:

---
title: CLI Overview
sidebarTitle: Overview
description: The Milaidy CLI is the primary interface for managing agents, plugins, configuration, and deployment from the terminal.
---

The `milaidy` CLI is the primary interface for managing the Milaidy AI agent. Every command is registered through the Commander.js framework and supports `--help` for inline documentation.

## Installation

```bash
bun install -g milaidy
```

Or run directly:

```bash
bunx milaidy
```

## Global Flags

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--help`, `-h` | Show help for any command |
| `--version`, `-V` | Print version number |
| `--profile <name>` | Use a named configuration profile |
| `--verbose` | Enable verbose logging |
| `--quiet` | Suppress non-essential output |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

## Commands

<CardGroup cols={2}>

<Card title="start" icon="play" href="/cli/start">
  Start the agent runtime with optional character file and configuration overrides.
</Card>

<Card title="tui" icon="terminal" href="/cli/tui">
  Launch the terminal user interface for interactive agent management.
</Card>

<Card title="setup" icon="gear" href="/cli/setup">
  Run the interactive setup wizard to configure API keys and preferences.
</Card>

<Card title="configure" icon="sliders" href="/cli/configure">
  Modify runtime configuration interactively or via flags.
</Card>

<Card title="config" icon="file-code" href="/cli/config">
  Read and write configuration values directly.
</Card>

<Card title="dashboard" icon="gauge" href="/cli/dashboard">
  Launch the web dashboard for browser-based management.
</Card>

<Card title="models" icon="brain" href="/cli/models">
  List, test, and manage model providers and configurations.
</Card>

<Card title="plugins" icon="plug" href="/cli/plugins">
  Install, remove, enable, disable, and eject plugins.
</Card>

<Card title="update" icon="arrow-up" href="/cli/update">
  Check for and apply updates to the Milaidy installation.
</Card>

<Card title="doctor" icon="stethoscope" href="/cli/doctor">
  Diagnose common issues with your installation and configuration.
</Card>

</CardGroup>

## Quick Reference

```bash
# Start agent with default character
milaidy start

# Start with a specific character
milaidy start --character ./my-character.json

# Launch TUI
milaidy tui

# Run setup wizard
milaidy setup

# Install a plugin
milaidy plugins install @elizaos/plugin-openai

# Check for updates
milaidy update

# Diagnose issues
milaidy doctor
```

## Environment Variables

See [Environment Reference](/cli/environment) for a complete list of environment variables that affect CLI behavior.

## Related

- [Installation](/installation) — Install Milaidy
- [Quickstart](/quickstart) — Get started in minutes
- [Configuration](/configuration) — Configuration file reference

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/cli/overview.md, after:

---
title: CLI Overview
sidebarTitle: Overview
description: The Milady CLI is the primary interface for managing agents, plugins, configuration, and deployment from the terminal.
---

The `milady` CLI is the primary interface for managing the Milady AI agent. Every command is registered through the Commander.js framework and supports `--help` for inline documentation.

## Installation

```bash
bun install -g milaidy
```

Or run directly:

```bash
bunx milady
```

## Global Flags

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--help`, `-h` | Show help for any command |
| `--version`, `-V` | Print version number |
| `--profile <name>` | Use a named configuration profile |
| `--verbose` | Enable verbose logging |
| `--quiet` | Suppress non-essential output |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

## Commands

<CardGroup cols={2}>

<Card title="start" icon="play" href="/cli/start">
  Start the agent runtime with optional character file and configuration overrides.
</Card>

<Card title="tui" icon="terminal" href="/cli/tui">
  Launch the terminal user interface for interactive agent management.
</Card>

<Card title="setup" icon="gear" href="/cli/setup">
  Run the interactive setup wizard to configure API keys and preferences.
</Card>

<Card title="configure" icon="sliders" href="/cli/configure">
  Modify runtime configuration interactively or via flags.
</Card>

<Card title="config" icon="file-code" href="/cli/config">
  Read and write configuration values directly.
</Card>

<Card title="dashboard" icon="gauge" href="/cli/dashboard">
  Launch the web dashboard for browser-based management.
</Card>

<Card title="models" icon="brain" href="/cli/models">
  List, test, and manage model providers and configurations.
</Card>

<Card title="plugins" icon="plug" href="/cli/plugins">
  Install, remove, enable, disable, and eject plugins.
</Card>

<Card title="update" icon="arrow-up" href="/cli/update">
  Check for and apply updates to the Milady installation.
</Card>

<Card title="doctor" icon="stethoscope" href="/cli/doctor">
  Diagnose common issues with your installation and configuration.
</Card>

</CardGroup>

## Quick Reference

```bash
# Start agent with default character
milady start

# Start with a specific character
milady start --character ./my-character.json

# Launch TUI
milady tui

# Run setup wizard
milady setup

# Install a plugin
milady plugins install @elizaos/plugin-openai

# Check for updates
milady update

# Diagnose issues
milady doctor
```

## Environment Variables

See [Environment Reference](/cli/environment) for a complete list of environment variables that affect CLI behavior.

## Related

- [Installation](/installation) — Install Milady
- [Quickstart](/quickstart) — Get started in minutes
- [Configuration](/configuration) — Configuration file reference
