docs/plugins/create-a-plugin.md, before:

---
title: "Create a Plugin"
sidebarTitle: "Create a Plugin"
description: "Step-by-step tutorial for building a Milaidy plugin from scratch — scaffolding, actions, providers, testing, and local development."
---

This tutorial walks you through creating a complete plugin from scratch. By the end you will have a working plugin with an action, a provider, and a background service running inside the Milaidy runtime.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 22 or later
- A working Milaidy installation (`milaidy start` runs without errors)

## Step 1: Scaffold the Project

Create the directory structure:

```
my-plugin/
├── package.json
├── tsconfig.json
└── src/
    └── index.ts
```

### package.json

```json
{
  "name": "@elizaos/plugin-my-feature",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "type": "module",
  "main": "dist/index.js",
  "types": "dist/index.d.ts",
  "scripts": {
    "build": "tsc",
    "dev": "tsc --watch",
    "test": "vitest run"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "@elizaos/core": "next"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "typescript": "^5.0.0",
    "vitest": "^4.0.0"
  }
}
```

### tsconfig.json

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "ES2022",
    "module": "NodeNext",
    "moduleResolution": "NodeNext",
    "outDir": "dist",
    "declaration": true,
    "strict": true
  },
  "include": ["src"]
}
```

## Step 2: Implement an Action

Actions are things the agent can do. The LLM selects actions from the registered list based on description and examples.

```typescript
// src/actions/weather.ts
import type { Action } from "@elizaos/core";

export const checkWeatherAction: Action = {
  name: "CHECK_WEATHER",
  description: "Check the current weather for a city",
  similes: ["GET_WEATHER", "WEATHER_LOOKUP", "FORECAST"],

  validate: async (_runtime, _message, _state) => {
    // Return false if the required API key is missing
    return Boolean(process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY);
  },

  handler: async (_runtime, _message, _state, options, _callback) => {
    const params = options?.parameters as Record<string, unknown> | undefined;
    const city = typeof params?.city === "string" ? params.city : "London";

    try {
      const url = `https://api.example-weather.com/current?city=${encodeURIComponent(city)}&key=${process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY}`;
      const res = await fetch(url);
      const data = await res.json() as { temp: number; condition: string };

      return {
        success: true,
        text: `Weather in ${city}: ${data.temp}°C, ${data.condition}`,
        data: { city, temp: data.temp, condition: data.condition },
      };
    } catch (err) {
      return {
        success: false,
        error: `Failed to fetch weather: ${err instanceof Error ? err.message : String(err)}`,
      };
    }
  },

  parameters: [
    {
      name: "city",
      description: "The city to check weather for",
      required: false,
      schema: { type: "string" },
    },
  ],

  examples: [
    [
      { user: "user", content: { text: "What's the weather in Tokyo?" } },
      { user: "assistant", content: { text: "Weather in Tokyo: 22°C, Partly cloudy", action: "CHECK_WEATHER" } },
    ],
  ],
};
```

## Step 3: Implement a Provider

Providers inject context into the agent's prompt before each LLM inference. Unlike actions, they run automatically.

```typescript
// src/providers/status.ts
import type { Provider } from "@elizaos/core";

export const pluginStatusProvider: Provider = {
  name: "weatherPluginStatus",
  description: "Provides current plugin status and configuration",
  position: 10, // Run after core providers

  get: async (_runtime, _message, _state) => {
    const hasApiKey = Boolean(process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY);

    return {
      text: hasApiKey
        ? "Weather plugin is active. You can check weather for any city."
        : "Weather plugin is configured but missing WEATHER_API_KEY.",
      values: {
        weatherPluginActive: hasApiKey,
      },
    };
  },
};
```

## Step 4: Implement a Service

Services are long-running background processes that start with the runtime.

```typescript
// src/services/weather-cache.ts
import type { IAgentRuntime, Service } from "@elizaos/core";

let cacheInterval: NodeJS.Timeout | undefined;
const weatherCache = new Map<string, { temp: number; condition: string; fetchedAt: number }>();

export const WeatherCacheService = {
  serviceType: "weather_cache",

  start: async (_runtime: IAgentRuntime): Promise<Service> => {
    // Refresh cache every 10 minutes
    cacheInterval = setInterval(() => {
      const now = Date.now();
      for (const [city, entry] of weatherCache) {
        if (now - entry.fetchedAt > 10 * 60 * 1000) {
          weatherCache.delete(city);
        }
      }
    }, 60_000);

    return {
      stop: async () => {
        if (cacheInterval) clearInterval(cacheInterval);
        weatherCache.clear();
      },
    } as Service;
  },
};
```

## Step 5: Assemble the Plugin

```typescript
// src/index.ts
import type { Plugin } from "@elizaos/core";
import { checkWeatherAction } from "./actions/weather";
import { pluginStatusProvider } from "./providers/status";
import { WeatherCacheService } from "./services/weather-cache";

const weatherPlugin: Plugin = {
  name: "weather-plugin",
  description: "Provides real-time weather information for any city",
  priority: 10,

  init: async (_config, runtime) => {
    runtime.logger?.info("[weather-plugin] Initialized");
    if (!process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY) {
      runtime.logger?.warn("[weather-plugin] WEATHER_API_KEY not set — CHECK_WEATHER action will be disabled");
    }
  },

  actions: [checkWeatherAction],
  providers: [pluginStatusProvider],
  services: [WeatherCacheService as any],
};

export default weatherPlugin;
```

## Step 6: Write Tests

```typescript
// src/index.test.ts
import { describe, it, expect, vi } from "vitest";
import weatherPlugin from "./index";

const mockRuntime = {
  logger: { info: vi.fn(), warn: vi.fn(), error: vi.fn() },
} as any;

const mockMessage = { content: { text: "What is the weather in Paris?" } } as any;

describe("weather-plugin", () => {
  it("exports a valid plugin", () => {
    expect(weatherPlugin.name).toBe("weather-plugin");
    expect(weatherPlugin.actions).toHaveLength(1);
    expect(weatherPlugin.providers).toHaveLength(1);
  });

  it("CHECK_WEATHER action fails validation without API key", async () => {
    delete process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY;
    const action = weatherPlugin.actions![0];
    const valid = await action.validate(mockRuntime, mockMessage, undefined as any);
    expect(valid).toBe(false);
  });

  it("CHECK_WEATHER action passes validation with API key", async () => {
    process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY = "test-key";
    const action = weatherPlugin.actions![0];
    const valid = await action.validate(mockRuntime, mockMessage, undefined as any);
    expect(valid).toBe(true);
    delete process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY;
  });
});
```

## Step 7: Register with Runtime

### Option A: Local Plugin (Development)

Place the plugin directory inside the project:

```
milaidy-project/
└── plugins/
    └── weather-plugin/
        ├── package.json
        └── src/index.ts
```

Milaidy automatically discovers plugins in the `plugins/` directory.

### Option B: Config-Based Loading

Add to `milaidy.json`:

```json
{
  "plugins": {
    "allow": ["weather-plugin"],
    "entries": {
      "weather-plugin": {
        "path": "./plugins/weather-plugin"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Option C: Character File

```json
{
  "name": "MyAgent",
  "plugins": ["./plugins/weather-plugin"],
  "settings": {
    "secrets": {
      "WEATHER_API_KEY": "your-key-here"
    }
  }
}
```

## Step 8: Build and Test

```bash
# Build the plugin
cd my-plugin && npm run build

# Run tests
npm test

# Start Milaidy with the plugin loaded
milaidy start
```

Check the logs for `[weather-plugin] Initialized` to confirm the plugin loaded.

## Next Steps

- [Plugin Patterns](/plugins/patterns) — Common patterns for services, state, and error handling
- [Plugin Schemas](/plugins/schemas) — Full schema reference for all plugin types
- [Publish a Plugin](/plugins/publish) — Publish to the npm registry

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/plugins/create-a-plugin.md, after:

---
title: "Create a Plugin"
sidebarTitle: "Create a Plugin"
description: "Step-by-step tutorial for building a Milady plugin from scratch — scaffolding, actions, providers, testing, and local development."
---

This tutorial walks you through creating a complete plugin from scratch. By the end you will have a working plugin with an action, a provider, and a background service running inside the Milady runtime.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 22 or later
- A working Milady installation (`milady start` runs without errors)

## Step 1: Scaffold the Project

Create the directory structure:

```
my-plugin/
├── package.json
├── tsconfig.json
└── src/
    └── index.ts
```

### package.json

```json
{
  "name": "@elizaos/plugin-my-feature",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "type": "module",
  "main": "dist/index.js",
  "types": "dist/index.d.ts",
  "scripts": {
    "build": "tsc",
    "dev": "tsc --watch",
    "test": "vitest run"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "@elizaos/core": "next"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "typescript": "^5.0.0",
    "vitest": "^4.0.0"
  }
}
```

### tsconfig.json

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "ES2022",
    "module": "NodeNext",
    "moduleResolution": "NodeNext",
    "outDir": "dist",
    "declaration": true,
    "strict": true
  },
  "include": ["src"]
}
```

## Step 2: Implement an Action

Actions are things the agent can do. The LLM selects actions from the registered list based on description and examples.

```typescript
// src/actions/weather.ts
import type { Action } from "@elizaos/core";

export const checkWeatherAction: Action = {
  name: "CHECK_WEATHER",
  description: "Check the current weather for a city",
  similes: ["GET_WEATHER", "WEATHER_LOOKUP", "FORECAST"],

  validate: async (_runtime, _message, _state) => {
    // Return false if the required API key is missing
    return Boolean(process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY);
  },

  handler: async (_runtime, _message, _state, options, _callback) => {
    const params = options?.parameters as Record<string, unknown> | undefined;
    const city = typeof params?.city === "string" ? params.city : "London";

    try {
      const url = `https://api.example-weather.com/current?city=${encodeURIComponent(city)}&key=${process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY}`;
      const res = await fetch(url);
      const data = await res.json() as { temp: number; condition: string };

      return {
        success: true,
        text: `Weather in ${city}: ${data.temp}°C, ${data.condition}`,
        data: { city, temp: data.temp, condition: data.condition },
      };
    } catch (err) {
      return {
        success: false,
        error: `Failed to fetch weather: ${err instanceof Error ? err.message : String(err)}`,
      };
    }
  },

  parameters: [
    {
      name: "city",
      description: "The city to check weather for",
      required: false,
      schema: { type: "string" },
    },
  ],

  examples: [
    [
      { user: "user", content: { text: "What's the weather in Tokyo?" } },
      { user: "assistant", content: { text: "Weather in Tokyo: 22°C, Partly cloudy", action: "CHECK_WEATHER" } },
    ],
  ],
};
```

## Step 3: Implement a Provider

Providers inject context into the agent's prompt before each LLM inference. Unlike actions, they run automatically.

```typescript
// src/providers/status.ts
import type { Provider } from "@elizaos/core";

export const pluginStatusProvider: Provider = {
  name: "weatherPluginStatus",
  description: "Provides current plugin status and configuration",
  position: 10, // Run after core providers

  get: async (_runtime, _message, _state) => {
    const hasApiKey = Boolean(process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY);

    return {
      text: hasApiKey
        ? "Weather plugin is active. You can check weather for any city."
        : "Weather plugin is configured but missing WEATHER_API_KEY.",
      values: {
        weatherPluginActive: hasApiKey,
      },
    };
  },
};
```

## Step 4: Implement a Service

Services are long-running background processes that start with the runtime.

```typescript
// src/services/weather-cache.ts
import type { IAgentRuntime, Service } from "@elizaos/core";

let cacheInterval: NodeJS.Timeout | undefined;
const weatherCache = new Map<string, { temp: number; condition: string; fetchedAt: number }>();

export const WeatherCacheService = {
  serviceType: "weather_cache",

  start: async (_runtime: IAgentRuntime): Promise<Service> => {
    // Refresh cache every 10 minutes
    cacheInterval = setInterval(() => {
      const now = Date.now();
      for (const [city, entry] of weatherCache) {
        if (now - entry.fetchedAt > 10 * 60 * 1000) {
          weatherCache.delete(city);
        }
      }
    }, 60_000);

    return {
      stop: async () => {
        if (cacheInterval) clearInterval(cacheInterval);
        weatherCache.clear();
      },
    } as Service;
  },
};
```

## Step 5: Assemble the Plugin

```typescript
// src/index.ts
import type { Plugin } from "@elizaos/core";
import { checkWeatherAction } from "./actions/weather";
import { pluginStatusProvider } from "./providers/status";
import { WeatherCacheService } from "./services/weather-cache";

const weatherPlugin: Plugin = {
  name: "weather-plugin",
  description: "Provides real-time weather information for any city",
  priority: 10,

  init: async (_config, runtime) => {
    runtime.logger?.info("[weather-plugin] Initialized");
    if (!process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY) {
      runtime.logger?.warn("[weather-plugin] WEATHER_API_KEY not set — CHECK_WEATHER action will be disabled");
    }
  },

  actions: [checkWeatherAction],
  providers: [pluginStatusProvider],
  services: [WeatherCacheService as any],
};

export default weatherPlugin;
```

## Step 6: Write Tests

```typescript
// src/index.test.ts
import { describe, it, expect, vi } from "vitest";
import weatherPlugin from "./index";

const mockRuntime = {
  logger: { info: vi.fn(), warn: vi.fn(), error: vi.fn() },
} as any;

const mockMessage = { content: { text: "What is the weather in Paris?" } } as any;

describe("weather-plugin", () => {
  it("exports a valid plugin", () => {
    expect(weatherPlugin.name).toBe("weather-plugin");
    expect(weatherPlugin.actions).toHaveLength(1);
    expect(weatherPlugin.providers).toHaveLength(1);
  });

  it("CHECK_WEATHER action fails validation without API key", async () => {
    delete process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY;
    const action = weatherPlugin.actions![0];
    const valid = await action.validate(mockRuntime, mockMessage, undefined as any);
    expect(valid).toBe(false);
  });

  it("CHECK_WEATHER action passes validation with API key", async () => {
    process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY = "test-key";
    const action = weatherPlugin.actions![0];
    const valid = await action.validate(mockRuntime, mockMessage, undefined as any);
    expect(valid).toBe(true);
    delete process.env.WEATHER_API_KEY;
  });
});
```

## Step 7: Register with Runtime

### Option A: Local Plugin (Development)

Place the plugin directory inside the project:

```
milady-project/
└── plugins/
    └── weather-plugin/
        ├── package.json
        └── src/index.ts
```

Milady automatically discovers plugins in the `plugins/` directory.

### Option B: Config-Based Loading

Add to `milady.json`:

```json
{
  "plugins": {
    "allow": ["weather-plugin"],
    "entries": {
      "weather-plugin": {
        "path": "./plugins/weather-plugin"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Option C: Character File

```json
{
  "name": "MyAgent",
  "plugins": ["./plugins/weather-plugin"],
  "settings": {
    "secrets": {
      "WEATHER_API_KEY": "your-key-here"
    }
  }
}
```

## Step 8: Build and Test

```bash
# Build the plugin
cd my-plugin && npm run build

# Run tests
npm test

# Start Milady with the plugin loaded
milady start
```

Check the logs for `[weather-plugin] Initialized` to confirm the plugin loaded.

## Next Steps

- [Plugin Patterns](/plugins/patterns) — Common patterns for services, state, and error handling
- [Plugin Schemas](/plugins/schemas) — Full schema reference for all plugin types
- [Publish a Plugin](/plugins/publish) — Publish to the npm registry
