docs/plugins/overview.md, before:

---
title: Plugins Overview
sidebarTitle: Overview
description: Milaidy's plugin system provides modular capabilities — model providers, platform connectors, DeFi integrations, and custom features.
---

Plugins are the primary extension mechanism for Milaidy. Every capability beyond the core runtime — from LLM providers to blockchain interactions — is delivered as a plugin.

## What is a Plugin?

A plugin is a self-contained module that registers one or more of:

- **Actions** — Things the agent can do (e.g., send a tweet, swap tokens)
- **Providers** — Context injected into the agent's prompt (e.g., wallet balance, time)
- **Evaluators** — Post-processing logic that runs after each response
- **Services** — Long-running background processes (e.g., cron jobs, event listeners)

## Plugin Categories

<CardGroup cols={2}>

<Card title="Core Plugins" icon="cube" href="/plugin-registry/bootstrap">
  Essential plugins that ship with every Milaidy installation — message processing, knowledge, database, and secrets.
</Card>

<Card title="Model Providers" icon="brain" href="/plugin-registry/llm/openai">
  LLM integrations for OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, Groq, Ollama, OpenRouter, and DeepSeek.
</Card>

<Card title="Platform Connectors" icon="plug" href="/plugin-registry/platform/discord">
  Bridges to messaging platforms — Discord, Telegram, Twitter, Slack, WhatsApp, and Farcaster.
</Card>

<Card title="DeFi & Blockchain" icon="wallet" href="/plugin-registry/defi/evm">
  On-chain interactions for EVM chains and Solana — token transfers, swaps, and DeFi protocols.
</Card>

<Card title="Feature Plugins" icon="wand-magic-sparkles" href="/plugin-registry/browser">
  Extended capabilities — browser control, image generation, text-to-speech, computer use, and cron scheduling.
</Card>

</CardGroup>

## How Plugins Load

Plugins are loaded during runtime initialization in this order:

1. **Core plugins** — Always loaded (`bootstrap`, `knowledge`, `sql`)
2. **Auto-enabled plugins** — Enabled based on environment variables (e.g., `OPENAI_API_KEY` enables the OpenAI plugin)
3. **Character plugins** — Specified in the character file
4. **Local plugins** — Loaded from the `plugins/` directory

```typescript
// Character file plugin configuration
{
  "plugins": ["@elizaos/plugin-openai", "@elizaos/plugin-discord"],
  "settings": {
    "secrets": {
      "OPENAI_API_KEY": "sk-..."
    }
  }
}
```

## Plugin Lifecycle

```
Install → Register → Initialize → Active → Shutdown
```

1. **Install** — Plugin package is resolved (npm or local)
2. **Register** — Actions, providers, evaluators, and services are registered with the runtime
3. **Initialize** — `init()` is called with runtime context
4. **Active** — Plugin processes events and provides capabilities
5. **Shutdown** — `cleanup()` is called on runtime stop

## Managing Plugins

### Install from Registry

```bash
milaidy plugins install @elizaos/plugin-openai
```

### List Installed Plugins

```bash
milaidy plugins list
```

### Enable/Disable

```bash
milaidy plugins enable plugin-name
milaidy plugins disable plugin-name
```

### Eject (Copy to Local)

```bash
milaidy plugins eject plugin-name
```

See [Plugin Eject](/plugins/plugin-eject) for details on customizing ejected plugins.

## Related

- [Plugin Architecture](/plugins/architecture) — Deep dive into the plugin system
- [Create a Plugin](/plugins/create-a-plugin) — Step-by-step tutorial
- [Plugin Development](/plugins/development) — Development guide and API
- [Plugin Registry](/plugins/registry) — Browse available plugins

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/plugins/overview.md, after:

---
title: Plugins Overview
sidebarTitle: Overview
description: Milady's plugin system provides modular capabilities — model providers, platform connectors, DeFi integrations, and custom features.
---

Plugins are the primary extension mechanism for Milady. Every capability beyond the core runtime — from LLM providers to blockchain interactions — is delivered as a plugin.

## What is a Plugin?

A plugin is a self-contained module that registers one or more of:

- **Actions** — Things the agent can do (e.g., send a tweet, swap tokens)
- **Providers** — Context injected into the agent's prompt (e.g., wallet balance, time)
- **Evaluators** — Post-processing logic that runs after each response
- **Services** — Long-running background processes (e.g., cron jobs, event listeners)

## Plugin Categories

<CardGroup cols={2}>

<Card title="Core Plugins" icon="cube" href="/plugin-registry/bootstrap">
  Essential plugins that ship with every Milady installation — message processing, knowledge, database, and secrets.
</Card>

<Card title="Model Providers" icon="brain" href="/plugin-registry/llm/openai">
  LLM integrations for OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, Groq, Ollama, OpenRouter, and DeepSeek.
</Card>

<Card title="Platform Connectors" icon="plug" href="/plugin-registry/platform/discord">
  Bridges to messaging platforms — Discord, Telegram, Twitter, Slack, WhatsApp, and Farcaster.
</Card>

<Card title="DeFi & Blockchain" icon="wallet" href="/plugin-registry/defi/evm">
  On-chain interactions for EVM chains and Solana — token transfers, swaps, and DeFi protocols.
</Card>

<Card title="Feature Plugins" icon="wand-magic-sparkles" href="/plugin-registry/browser">
  Extended capabilities — browser control, image generation, text-to-speech, computer use, and cron scheduling.
</Card>

</CardGroup>

## How Plugins Load

Plugins are loaded during runtime initialization in this order:

1. **Core plugins** — Always loaded (`bootstrap`, `knowledge`, `sql`)
2. **Auto-enabled plugins** — Enabled based on environment variables (e.g., `OPENAI_API_KEY` enables the OpenAI plugin)
3. **Character plugins** — Specified in the character file
4. **Local plugins** — Loaded from the `plugins/` directory

```typescript
// Character file plugin configuration
{
  "plugins": ["@elizaos/plugin-openai", "@elizaos/plugin-discord"],
  "settings": {
    "secrets": {
      "OPENAI_API_KEY": "sk-..."
    }
  }
}
```

## Plugin Lifecycle

```
Install → Register → Initialize → Active → Shutdown
```

1. **Install** — Plugin package is resolved (npm or local)
2. **Register** — Actions, providers, evaluators, and services are registered with the runtime
3. **Initialize** — `init()` is called with runtime context
4. **Active** — Plugin processes events and provides capabilities
5. **Shutdown** — `cleanup()` is called on runtime stop

## Managing Plugins

### Install from Registry

```bash
milady plugins install @elizaos/plugin-openai
```

### List Installed Plugins

```bash
milady plugins list
```

### Enable/Disable

```bash
milady plugins enable plugin-name
milady plugins disable plugin-name
```

### Eject (Copy to Local)

```bash
milady plugins eject plugin-name
```

See [Plugin Eject](/plugins/plugin-eject) for details on customizing ejected plugins.

## Related

- [Plugin Architecture](/plugins/architecture) — Deep dive into the plugin system
- [Create a Plugin](/plugins/create-a-plugin) — Step-by-step tutorial
- [Plugin Development](/plugins/development) — Development guide and API
- [Plugin Registry](/plugins/registry) — Browse available plugins
