docs/plugins/skills.md, before:

---
title: "Skills"
sidebarTitle: "Skills"
description: "Markdown-based extensions that teach the agent how to perform specific tasks."
---

Skills are markdown-based extensions that teach the Milaidy agent how to perform specific tasks. Each skill is a folder containing a `SKILL.md` file with YAML frontmatter and instructional content that gets injected into the agent's context at runtime.

---

## What Are Skills?

A skill is a self-contained unit of knowledge packaged as a directory. At minimum it contains a `SKILL.md` file. The agent reads the skill's instructions and follows them when performing relevant tasks.

Skills can include:

- **Instructions** -- the markdown body of `SKILL.md`, telling the agent what to do
- **Scripts** -- optional shell or Node scripts for setup or automation
- **References** -- additional markdown files loaded into context
- **Assets** -- templates, config files, or other supporting material

### Skills vs Plugins

| Aspect | Skills | Plugins |
|--------|--------|---------|
| Format | Markdown (`SKILL.md`) | TypeScript code |
| Complexity | Low -- documentation-focused | High -- full programmatic control |
| Runtime | Injected into agent prompts | Runs as executable code |
| Use case | Task instructions, workflows | Actions, services, API integrations |
| Installation | Drop a folder or install from marketplace | `milaidy plugin install` |

Use skills when you want to teach the agent a procedure. Use plugins when you need executable logic, background services, or API routes.

---

## SKILL.md Format

Every skill directory must contain a `SKILL.md` file. This file has two parts: YAML frontmatter and markdown instructions.

### Example

```markdown
---
name: github
description: "Interact with GitHub using the `gh` CLI"
required-bins:
  - gh
---

# GitHub Skill

Use the `gh` CLI to interact with GitHub repositories.

## Pull Requests

```bash
gh pr list --repo owner/repo
gh pr checks 55 --repo owner/repo
```

## Issues

```bash
gh issue list --repo owner/repo --state open
```
```

### Frontmatter Fields

The YAML frontmatter between `---` delimiters is parsed to extract skill metadata. The parser reads simple `key: value` lines from the frontmatter block.

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `name` | string | Yes | Skill identifier. Should match the folder name. |
| `description` | string | Yes | What the skill does. Shown to the agent and in the UI. |
| `required-os` | string[] | No | Restrict to specific platforms: `macos`, `linux`, `windows`. |
| `required-bins` | string[] | No | CLI tools that must exist in `PATH` for the skill to load. |
| `required-env` | string[] | No | Environment variables that must be set. |
| `user-invocable` | boolean | No | Whether users can invoke the skill directly. Default: `true`. |
| `disable-model-invocation` | boolean | No | If `true`, the skill content is not injected into prompts. |
| `primary-env` | string | No | Primary runtime environment: `node`, `python`, `shell`. |
| `command-dispatch` | string | No | How commands are dispatched (e.g., `shell`). |
| `command-tool` | string | No | Tool used for command execution (e.g., `bash`). |
| `metadata` | object | No | Arbitrary additional data (JSON object). |

**Parsing behavior:** The frontmatter parser extracts `name` and `description` from simple `key: value` lines. If the frontmatter is missing or malformed, Milaidy falls back to reading the first markdown heading as the skill name and the first non-heading paragraph as the description.

---

## Skill Locations

Milaidy discovers skills from multiple directories. Skills found in later (higher-precedence) directories override earlier ones with the same name.

### 1. Bundled Skills (lowest precedence)

Shipped with the `@elizaos/plugin-agent-skills` package. These are automatically available when the plugin is loaded. The bundled skills directory is resolved at startup via `getSkillsDir()` and passed to the runtime as `BUNDLED_SKILLS_DIRS`.

### 2. Extra Directories

Additional directories configured in `~/.milady/config.json`:

```json
{
  "skills": {
    "load": {
      "extraDirs": [
        "/path/to/shared-team-skills",
        "/path/to/another-skills-dir"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

### 3. Managed Skills

Global user-level skills stored at:

```
~/.milady/skills/
├── my-custom-skill/
│   └── SKILL.md
└── team-shared-skill/
    └── SKILL.md
```

The catalog file is also stored here at `~/.milady/skills/catalog.json`.

### 4. Workspace Skills (highest precedence)

Project-local skills in the agent's workspace directory:

```
~/.milady/workspace/skills/
├── project-specific-skill/
│   └── SKILL.md
└── override-bundled-skill/
    └── SKILL.md
```

### 5. Marketplace Skills

Skills installed from the marketplace are placed under:

```
~/.milady/workspace/skills/.marketplace/
├── content-marketer/
│   ├── SKILL.md
│   └── .scan-results.json
└── seo-optimizer/
    ├── SKILL.md
    └── .scan-results.json
```

Install records are tracked in `~/.milady/workspace/skills/.cache/marketplace-installs.json`.

---

## Skill Loading Priority

When two skills share the same name, the higher-precedence source wins. The full resolution order (lowest to highest):

1. **Bundled skills** -- from `@elizaos/plugin-agent-skills`
2. **Extra directories** -- from `skills.load.extraDirs` config
3. **Managed skills** -- from `~/.milady/skills/`
4. **Workspace skills** -- from `{workspace}/skills/`
5. **Marketplace skills** -- from `{workspace}/skills/.marketplace/`

### Enable/Disable Priority

Whether a skill is active is determined by this cascade (highest priority first):

1. **Database preferences** -- per-agent toggle set via the API (`PUT /api/skills/:id`)
2. **`skills.denyBundled`** -- config deny list, always blocks
3. **`skills.entries[id].enabled`** -- per-skill config flag
4. **`skills.allowBundled`** -- config allow list (whitelist mode: only listed skills load)
5. **Default** -- enabled

Configuration example in `~/.milady/config.json`:

```json
{
  "skills": {
    "allowBundled": ["github", "weather", "coding-agent"],
    "denyBundled": ["deprecated-skill"],
    "entries": {
      "github": { "enabled": true },
      "noisy-skill": { "enabled": false }
    }
  }
}
```

---

## Skill Marketplace

The skill marketplace allows you to search for, install, and manage community-published skills. The default marketplace is [ClawHub](https://clawhub.ai).

### Marketplace Configuration

The marketplace URL is resolved from environment variables in this order:

1. `SKILLS_REGISTRY`
2. `CLAWHUB_REGISTRY`
3. `SKILLS_MARKETPLACE_URL`
4. Default: `https://clawhub.ai`

If no registry is configured, Milaidy automatically sets `SKILLS_REGISTRY=https://clawhub.ai` at startup.

For the legacy SkillsMP marketplace, set the `SKILLSMP_API_KEY` environment variable:

```bash
export MILADY_SKILLSMP_API_KEY="your-api-key"
```

### Searching the Marketplace

**Via the API:**

```
GET /api/skills/marketplace/search?q=content+marketing&limit=20
```

The search endpoint queries the configured marketplace registry and returns results with name, description, repository URL, tags, and relevance score.

**Response shape:**

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "results": [
    {
      "id": "content-marketer",
      "slug": "content-marketer",
      "name": "Content Marketer",
      "description": "Generate blog posts and social media content",
      "repository": "owner/repo",
      "githubUrl": "https://github.com/owner/repo",
      "path": "skills/content-marketer",
      "tags": ["marketing", "content"],
      "score": 0.95,
      "source": "clawhub"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Installing from the Marketplace

There are two installation paths:

**1. By slug (ClawHub catalog install):**

```
POST /api/skills/marketplace/install
Content-Type: application/json

{ "slug": "content-marketer" }
```

This uses the `AgentSkillsService.install()` method, which resolves the skill from the catalog and installs it into the managed skills directory.

**2. By GitHub URL or repository (git-based install):**

```
POST /api/skills/marketplace/install
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "githubUrl": "https://github.com/owner/repo/tree/main/skills/my-skill",
  "name": "my-skill",
  "source": "clawhub"
}
```

Or by repository and path:

```
POST /api/skills/marketplace/install
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "repository": "owner/repo",
  "path": "skills/my-skill"
}
```

The git-based installer performs a **shallow sparse checkout** of only the skill directory (not the entire repository), copies it to `{workspace}/skills/.marketplace/{id}/`, validates that `SKILL.md` exists, and runs a security scan.

**Skill path auto-detection:** If no path is provided, the installer probes the repository for:
1. A `SKILL.md` at the repository root
2. Subdirectories under `skills/` that contain `SKILL.md`

### Listing Installed Marketplace Skills

```
GET /api/skills/marketplace/installed
```

Returns all skills installed via the marketplace, sorted by install date (newest first). Each entry includes the skill ID, source repository, install path, install timestamp, and security scan status.

### Uninstalling Marketplace Skills

```
POST /api/skills/marketplace/uninstall
Content-Type: application/json

{ "id": "content-marketer" }
```

The uninstaller verifies the skill's install path is within the expected `.marketplace` directory before removing it, preventing path traversal attacks. The install record is also removed from `marketplace-installs.json`.

---

## Security Scanning

Every skill installed from the marketplace is automatically scanned before it becomes available. The scan checks for structural attacks at the install boundary.

### What Is Scanned

| Check | Severity | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| Binary files | `critical` | Detects executable files (`.exe`, `.dll`, `.so`, `.dylib`, `.wasm`, `.bin`, `.com`, `.bat`, `.cmd`) |
| Symlink escapes | `critical` | Detects symbolic links pointing outside the skill directory |
| Missing `SKILL.md` | `critical` | Validates the skill package has the required entry file |

### Scan Statuses

| Status | Meaning |
|--------|---------|
| `clean` | No issues found |
| `warning` | Non-critical warnings detected |
| `critical` | Critical findings but not blocking |
| `blocked` | Skill is rejected and removed from disk |

### Blocking Behavior

If a scan returns `blocked` status (binary files, symlink escapes, or missing `SKILL.md`), the skill directory is **automatically deleted** and the install fails with an error:

```
Skill "bad-skill" blocked by security scan: Binary executable file detected (.exe); Symbolic link points outside skill directory
```

### Scan Reports

Scan results are persisted as `.scan-results.json` inside the skill directory:

```json
{
  "scannedAt": "2026-02-19T12:00:00.000Z",
  "status": "clean",
  "summary": {
    "scannedFiles": 5,
    "critical": 0,
    "warn": 0,
    "info": 0
  },
  "findings": [],
  "manifestFindings": [],
  "skillPath": "/Users/you/.milady/workspace/skills/.marketplace/my-skill"
}
```

You can retrieve a skill's scan report via the API:

```
GET /api/skills/:id/scan
```

The full content-level scan (code and markdown pattern analysis) is performed by the `AgentSkillsService` when it loads the skill. The marketplace scanner handles structural checks at install time.

---

## Skill Catalog

The skill catalog provides a local, cached index of all available skills from the registry. It enables fast browsing and searching without hitting the network on every request.

### How the Catalog Works

1. **File-based cache:** The catalog is stored as `catalog.json` and loaded from disk
2. **Memory cache:** Once loaded, skills are cached in memory for 10 minutes (`MEMORY_TTL_MS = 600_000`)
3. **Lazy loading:** The catalog is read on first access, not at startup

### Catalog File Locations

The catalog client checks these paths in order:

1. `MILADY_SKILLS_CATALOG` environment variable (if set, used exclusively)
2. `skills/.cache/catalog.json` relative to the package root (walks up to 5 parent directories)
3. `~/.milady/skills/catalog.json` (home directory fallback)

### Catalog Entry Shape

Each catalog skill contains:

```typescript
{
  slug: string;           // Unique identifier
  displayName: string;    // Human-readable name
  summary: string | null; // Short description
  tags: Record<string, string>;
  stats: {
    comments: number;
    downloads: number;
    installsAllTime: number;
    installsCurrent: number;
    stars: number;
    versions: number;
  };
  createdAt: number;      // Unix timestamp
  updatedAt: number;
  latestVersion: {
    version: string;
    createdAt: number;
    changelog: string;
  } | null;
}
```

### Catalog API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/api/skills/catalog` | GET | Browse the full catalog (paginated) |
| `/api/skills/catalog/search?q=query` | GET | Search skills by name, summary, tags |
| `/api/skills/catalog/:slug` | GET | Get a single skill by slug |
| `/api/skills/catalog/refresh` | POST | Force-refresh the catalog from disk |
| `/api/skills/catalog/install` | POST | Install a catalog skill by slug |
| `/api/skills/catalog/uninstall` | POST | Uninstall a catalog skill by slug |

### Catalog Search Scoring

Local search uses fuzzy matching across multiple fields with weighted scoring:

| Match Type | Score |
|------------|-------|
| Exact slug or name match | +100 |
| Slug contains query | +50 |
| Name contains query | +45 |
| Summary contains query | +30 |
| Tag contains query | +20 |
| Per-term slug match | +15 |
| Per-term name match | +12 |
| Per-term summary match | +8 |
| Popularity boost (downloads > 50) | +3 |
| Popularity boost (downloads > 200) | +3 |
| Stars boost (stars > 0) | +2 |
| Active installs boost | +2 |

Results are sorted by score, then by download count for ties.

---

## Creating Custom Skills

### Directory Structure

```
my-skill/
├── SKILL.md              # Required -- frontmatter + instructions
├── scripts/              # Optional -- executable scripts
│   └── setup.sh
├── references/           # Optional -- additional docs to load
│   └── api-reference.md
└── assets/               # Optional -- templates, config files
    └── template.json
```

### Step 1: Create the Skill Directory

For a workspace-local skill:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.milady/workspace/skills/my-tool
```

For a globally available skill:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.milady/skills/my-tool
```

### Step 2: Write SKILL.md

```markdown
---
name: my-tool
description: "Use my-tool CLI for data processing"
required-bins:
  - my-tool
required-env:
  - MY_TOOL_API_KEY
---

# My Tool Skill

This skill teaches you how to use the `my-tool` CLI.

## Authentication

Set your API key:

```bash
export MY_TOOL_API_KEY="your-key-here"
```

## Basic Usage

### List Items

```bash
my-tool list --format json
```

### Create Item

```bash
my-tool create --name "New Item" --type standard
```

## Error Handling

- **401 Unauthorized**: Check MY_TOOL_API_KEY is set correctly
- **404 Not Found**: Verify the item ID exists
- **429 Rate Limited**: Wait 60 seconds and retry
```

### Step 3: Add Scripts (Optional)

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# scripts/setup.sh
set -e

echo "Checking my-tool installation..."
if ! command -v my-tool &> /dev/null; then
    echo "Installing my-tool..."
    npm install -g my-tool
fi

echo "my-tool is ready!"
```

### Step 4: Verify the Skill Loads

Refresh the skills list to confirm your skill is discovered:

```
POST /api/skills/refresh
```

Or restart the agent and check:

```
GET /api/skills
```

Your skill should appear in the response with the name and description from your frontmatter.

---

## Best Practices

### Keep Instructions Concise

Skill content is injected into the agent's context window. Be thorough but not verbose:

```markdown
<!-- Concise and actionable -->
## Listing Files

```bash
ls -la           # All files, long format
ls -lh *.txt     # Text files with human-readable sizes
```
```

### Provide Runnable Examples

Show actual commands, not just descriptions:

```markdown
<!-- Good: runnable example -->
```bash
gh issue list --repo owner/repo --search "bug" --state open
```
```

### Declare Requirements in Frontmatter

Do not assume tools are installed. Use `required-bins` and `required-env` so the agent knows what is needed:

```yaml
---
name: docker-skill
description: "Manage Docker containers"
required-bins:
  - docker
  - docker-compose
required-os:
  - macos
  - linux
---
```

### Handle Errors

Document common errors and their solutions so the agent can self-diagnose:

```markdown
## Troubleshooting

### "Permission denied"
```bash
chmod +x script.sh
```

### "Command not found"
```bash
brew install my-tool  # macOS
apt install my-tool   # Linux
```
```

### Test Your Skills

1. Read your `SKILL.md` and follow the instructions manually
2. Verify all commands work as written
3. Check that the frontmatter parses correctly (restart the agent, then `GET /api/skills`)
4. If the skill has requirements, test on a clean environment

---

## API Reference Summary

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/api/skills` | GET | List all discovered skills with enabled state |
| `/api/skills/refresh` | POST | Re-scan skill directories and refresh the list |
| `/api/skills/:id` | PUT | Enable or disable a skill (persisted per-agent) |
| `/api/skills/:id/scan` | GET | Get the security scan report for a skill |
| `/api/skills/catalog` | GET | Browse the full skill catalog |
| `/api/skills/catalog/search` | GET | Search the catalog |
| `/api/skills/catalog/:slug` | GET | Get a catalog skill by slug |
| `/api/skills/catalog/refresh` | POST | Force-refresh the catalog cache |
| `/api/skills/catalog/install` | POST | Install a skill from the catalog |
| `/api/skills/catalog/uninstall` | POST | Uninstall a catalog skill |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/search` | GET | Search the remote marketplace |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/installed` | GET | List marketplace-installed skills |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/install` | POST | Install from marketplace (git or slug) |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/uninstall` | POST | Uninstall a marketplace skill |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/config` | GET | Check marketplace API key status |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/config` | PUT | Set the marketplace API key |

---

## Environment Variables

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `MILADY_SKILLS_CATALOG` | Override the catalog file path |
| `SKILLS_REGISTRY` | Marketplace registry URL (default: `https://clawhub.ai`) |
| `CLAWHUB_REGISTRY` | Alternative to `SKILLS_REGISTRY` |
| `SKILLS_MARKETPLACE_URL` | Alternative to `SKILLS_REGISTRY` |
| `SKILLSMP_API_KEY` | API key for the legacy SkillsMP marketplace |
| `MILADY_STATE_DIR` | Override the base state directory (default: `~/.milady`) |
| `BUNDLED_SKILLS_DIRS` | Set by runtime -- path to bundled skills |
| `WORKSPACE_SKILLS_DIR` | Set by runtime -- path to workspace skills |
| `EXTRA_SKILLS_DIRS` | Set by runtime -- comma-separated extra skill directories |
| `SKILLS_ALLOWLIST` | Set by runtime -- comma-separated allowed skill IDs |
| `SKILLS_DENYLIST` | Set by runtime -- comma-separated denied skill IDs |

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/plugins/skills.md, after:

---
title: "Skills"
sidebarTitle: "Skills"
description: "Markdown-based extensions that teach the agent how to perform specific tasks."
---

Skills are markdown-based extensions that teach the Milady agent how to perform specific tasks. Each skill is a folder containing a `SKILL.md` file with YAML frontmatter and instructional content that gets injected into the agent's context at runtime.

---

## What Are Skills?

A skill is a self-contained unit of knowledge packaged as a directory. At minimum it contains a `SKILL.md` file. The agent reads the skill's instructions and follows them when performing relevant tasks.

Skills can include:

- **Instructions** -- the markdown body of `SKILL.md`, telling the agent what to do
- **Scripts** -- optional shell or Node scripts for setup or automation
- **References** -- additional markdown files loaded into context
- **Assets** -- templates, config files, or other supporting material

### Skills vs Plugins

| Aspect | Skills | Plugins |
|--------|--------|---------|
| Format | Markdown (`SKILL.md`) | TypeScript code |
| Complexity | Low -- documentation-focused | High -- full programmatic control |
| Runtime | Injected into agent prompts | Runs as executable code |
| Use case | Task instructions, workflows | Actions, services, API integrations |
| Installation | Drop a folder or install from marketplace | `milady plugin install` |

Use skills when you want to teach the agent a procedure. Use plugins when you need executable logic, background services, or API routes.

---

## SKILL.md Format

Every skill directory must contain a `SKILL.md` file. This file has two parts: YAML frontmatter and markdown instructions.

### Example

```markdown
---
name: github
description: "Interact with GitHub using the `gh` CLI"
required-bins:
  - gh
---

# GitHub Skill

Use the `gh` CLI to interact with GitHub repositories.

## Pull Requests

```bash
gh pr list --repo owner/repo
gh pr checks 55 --repo owner/repo
```

## Issues

```bash
gh issue list --repo owner/repo --state open
```
```

### Frontmatter Fields

The YAML frontmatter between `---` delimiters is parsed to extract skill metadata. The parser reads simple `key: value` lines from the frontmatter block.

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `name` | string | Yes | Skill identifier. Should match the folder name. |
| `description` | string | Yes | What the skill does. Shown to the agent and in the UI. |
| `required-os` | string[] | No | Restrict to specific platforms: `macos`, `linux`, `windows`. |
| `required-bins` | string[] | No | CLI tools that must exist in `PATH` for the skill to load. |
| `required-env` | string[] | No | Environment variables that must be set. |
| `user-invocable` | boolean | No | Whether users can invoke the skill directly. Default: `true`. |
| `disable-model-invocation` | boolean | No | If `true`, the skill content is not injected into prompts. |
| `primary-env` | string | No | Primary runtime environment: `node`, `python`, `shell`. |
| `command-dispatch` | string | No | How commands are dispatched (e.g., `shell`). |
| `command-tool` | string | No | Tool used for command execution (e.g., `bash`). |
| `metadata` | object | No | Arbitrary additional data (JSON object). |

**Parsing behavior:** The frontmatter parser extracts `name` and `description` from simple `key: value` lines. If the frontmatter is missing or malformed, Milady falls back to reading the first markdown heading as the skill name and the first non-heading paragraph as the description.

---

## Skill Locations

Milady discovers skills from multiple directories. Skills found in later (higher-precedence) directories override earlier ones with the same name.

### 1. Bundled Skills (lowest precedence)

Shipped with the `@elizaos/plugin-agent-skills` package. These are automatically available when the plugin is loaded. The bundled skills directory is resolved at startup via `getSkillsDir()` and passed to the runtime as `BUNDLED_SKILLS_DIRS`.

### 2. Extra Directories

Additional directories configured in `~/.milady/config.json`:

```json
{
  "skills": {
    "load": {
      "extraDirs": [
        "/path/to/shared-team-skills",
        "/path/to/another-skills-dir"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

### 3. Managed Skills

Global user-level skills stored at:

```
~/.milady/skills/
├── my-custom-skill/
│   └── SKILL.md
└── team-shared-skill/
    └── SKILL.md
```

The catalog file is also stored here at `~/.milady/skills/catalog.json`.

### 4. Workspace Skills (highest precedence)

Project-local skills in the agent's workspace directory:

```
~/.milady/workspace/skills/
├── project-specific-skill/
│   └── SKILL.md
└── override-bundled-skill/
    └── SKILL.md
```

### 5. Marketplace Skills

Skills installed from the marketplace are placed under:

```
~/.milady/workspace/skills/.marketplace/
├── content-marketer/
│   ├── SKILL.md
│   └── .scan-results.json
└── seo-optimizer/
    ├── SKILL.md
    └── .scan-results.json
```

Install records are tracked in `~/.milady/workspace/skills/.cache/marketplace-installs.json`.

---

## Skill Loading Priority

When two skills share the same name, the higher-precedence source wins. The full resolution order (lowest to highest):

1. **Bundled skills** -- from `@elizaos/plugin-agent-skills`
2. **Extra directories** -- from `skills.load.extraDirs` config
3. **Managed skills** -- from `~/.milady/skills/`
4. **Workspace skills** -- from `{workspace}/skills/`
5. **Marketplace skills** -- from `{workspace}/skills/.marketplace/`

### Enable/Disable Priority

Whether a skill is active is determined by this cascade (highest priority first):

1. **Database preferences** -- per-agent toggle set via the API (`PUT /api/skills/:id`)
2. **`skills.denyBundled`** -- config deny list, always blocks
3. **`skills.entries[id].enabled`** -- per-skill config flag
4. **`skills.allowBundled`** -- config allow list (whitelist mode: only listed skills load)
5. **Default** -- enabled

Configuration example in `~/.milady/config.json`:

```json
{
  "skills": {
    "allowBundled": ["github", "weather", "coding-agent"],
    "denyBundled": ["deprecated-skill"],
    "entries": {
      "github": { "enabled": true },
      "noisy-skill": { "enabled": false }
    }
  }
}
```

---

## Skill Marketplace

The skill marketplace allows you to search for, install, and manage community-published skills. The default marketplace is [ClawHub](https://clawhub.ai).

### Marketplace Configuration

The marketplace URL is resolved from environment variables in this order:

1. `SKILLS_REGISTRY`
2. `CLAWHUB_REGISTRY`
3. `SKILLS_MARKETPLACE_URL`
4. Default: `https://clawhub.ai`

If no registry is configured, Milady automatically sets `SKILLS_REGISTRY=https://clawhub.ai` at startup.

For the legacy SkillsMP marketplace, set the `SKILLSMP_API_KEY` environment variable:

```bash
export MILADY_SKILLSMP_API_KEY="your-api-key"
```

### Searching the Marketplace

**Via the API:**

```
GET /api/skills/marketplace/search?q=content+marketing&limit=20
```

The search endpoint queries the configured marketplace registry and returns results with name, description, repository URL, tags, and relevance score.

**Response shape:**

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "results": [
    {
      "id": "content-marketer",
      "slug": "content-marketer",
      "name": "Content Marketer",
      "description": "Generate blog posts and social media content",
      "repository": "owner/repo",
      "githubUrl": "https://github.com/owner/repo",
      "path": "skills/content-marketer",
      "tags": ["marketing", "content"],
      "score": 0.95,
      "source": "clawhub"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Installing from the Marketplace

There are two installation paths:

**1. By slug (ClawHub catalog install):**

```
POST /api/skills/marketplace/install
Content-Type: application/json

{ "slug": "content-marketer" }
```

This uses the `AgentSkillsService.install()` method, which resolves the skill from the catalog and installs it into the managed skills directory.

**2. By GitHub URL or repository (git-based install):**

```
POST /api/skills/marketplace/install
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "githubUrl": "https://github.com/owner/repo/tree/main/skills/my-skill",
  "name": "my-skill",
  "source": "clawhub"
}
```

Or by repository and path:

```
POST /api/skills/marketplace/install
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "repository": "owner/repo",
  "path": "skills/my-skill"
}
```

The git-based installer performs a **shallow sparse checkout** of only the skill directory (not the entire repository), copies it to `{workspace}/skills/.marketplace/{id}/`, validates that `SKILL.md` exists, and runs a security scan.

**Skill path auto-detection:** If no path is provided, the installer probes the repository for:
1. A `SKILL.md` at the repository root
2. Subdirectories under `skills/` that contain `SKILL.md`

### Listing Installed Marketplace Skills

```
GET /api/skills/marketplace/installed
```

Returns all skills installed via the marketplace, sorted by install date (newest first). Each entry includes the skill ID, source repository, install path, install timestamp, and security scan status.

### Uninstalling Marketplace Skills

```
POST /api/skills/marketplace/uninstall
Content-Type: application/json

{ "id": "content-marketer" }
```

The uninstaller verifies the skill's install path is within the expected `.marketplace` directory before removing it, preventing path traversal attacks. The install record is also removed from `marketplace-installs.json`.

---

## Security Scanning

Every skill installed from the marketplace is automatically scanned before it becomes available. The scan checks for structural attacks at the install boundary.

### What Is Scanned

| Check | Severity | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| Binary files | `critical` | Detects executable files (`.exe`, `.dll`, `.so`, `.dylib`, `.wasm`, `.bin`, `.com`, `.bat`, `.cmd`) |
| Symlink escapes | `critical` | Detects symbolic links pointing outside the skill directory |
| Missing `SKILL.md` | `critical` | Validates the skill package has the required entry file |

### Scan Statuses

| Status | Meaning |
|--------|---------|
| `clean` | No issues found |
| `warning` | Non-critical warnings detected |
| `critical` | Critical findings but not blocking |
| `blocked` | Skill is rejected and removed from disk |

### Blocking Behavior

If a scan returns `blocked` status (binary files, symlink escapes, or missing `SKILL.md`), the skill directory is **automatically deleted** and the install fails with an error:

```
Skill "bad-skill" blocked by security scan: Binary executable file detected (.exe); Symbolic link points outside skill directory
```

### Scan Reports

Scan results are persisted as `.scan-results.json` inside the skill directory:

```json
{
  "scannedAt": "2026-02-19T12:00:00.000Z",
  "status": "clean",
  "summary": {
    "scannedFiles": 5,
    "critical": 0,
    "warn": 0,
    "info": 0
  },
  "findings": [],
  "manifestFindings": [],
  "skillPath": "/Users/you/.milady/workspace/skills/.marketplace/my-skill"
}
```

You can retrieve a skill's scan report via the API:

```
GET /api/skills/:id/scan
```

The full content-level scan (code and markdown pattern analysis) is performed by the `AgentSkillsService` when it loads the skill. The marketplace scanner handles structural checks at install time.

---

## Skill Catalog

The skill catalog provides a local, cached index of all available skills from the registry. It enables fast browsing and searching without hitting the network on every request.

### How the Catalog Works

1. **File-based cache:** The catalog is stored as `catalog.json` and loaded from disk
2. **Memory cache:** Once loaded, skills are cached in memory for 10 minutes (`MEMORY_TTL_MS = 600_000`)
3. **Lazy loading:** The catalog is read on first access, not at startup

### Catalog File Locations

The catalog client checks these paths in order:

1. `MILADY_SKILLS_CATALOG` environment variable (if set, used exclusively)
2. `skills/.cache/catalog.json` relative to the package root (walks up to 5 parent directories)
3. `~/.milady/skills/catalog.json` (home directory fallback)

### Catalog Entry Shape

Each catalog skill contains:

```typescript
{
  slug: string;           // Unique identifier
  displayName: string;    // Human-readable name
  summary: string | null; // Short description
  tags: Record<string, string>;
  stats: {
    comments: number;
    downloads: number;
    installsAllTime: number;
    installsCurrent: number;
    stars: number;
    versions: number;
  };
  createdAt: number;      // Unix timestamp
  updatedAt: number;
  latestVersion: {
    version: string;
    createdAt: number;
    changelog: string;
  } | null;
}
```

### Catalog API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/api/skills/catalog` | GET | Browse the full catalog (paginated) |
| `/api/skills/catalog/search?q=query` | GET | Search skills by name, summary, tags |
| `/api/skills/catalog/:slug` | GET | Get a single skill by slug |
| `/api/skills/catalog/refresh` | POST | Force-refresh the catalog from disk |
| `/api/skills/catalog/install` | POST | Install a catalog skill by slug |
| `/api/skills/catalog/uninstall` | POST | Uninstall a catalog skill by slug |

### Catalog Search Scoring

Local search uses fuzzy matching across multiple fields with weighted scoring:

| Match Type | Score |
|------------|-------|
| Exact slug or name match | +100 |
| Slug contains query | +50 |
| Name contains query | +45 |
| Summary contains query | +30 |
| Tag contains query | +20 |
| Per-term slug match | +15 |
| Per-term name match | +12 |
| Per-term summary match | +8 |
| Popularity boost (downloads > 50) | +3 |
| Popularity boost (downloads > 200) | +3 |
| Stars boost (stars > 0) | +2 |
| Active installs boost | +2 |

Results are sorted by score, then by download count for ties.

---

## Creating Custom Skills

### Directory Structure

```
my-skill/
├── SKILL.md              # Required -- frontmatter + instructions
├── scripts/              # Optional -- executable scripts
│   └── setup.sh
├── references/           # Optional -- additional docs to load
│   └── api-reference.md
└── assets/               # Optional -- templates, config files
    └── template.json
```

### Step 1: Create the Skill Directory

For a workspace-local skill:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.milady/workspace/skills/my-tool
```

For a globally available skill:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.milady/skills/my-tool
```

### Step 2: Write SKILL.md

```markdown
---
name: my-tool
description: "Use my-tool CLI for data processing"
required-bins:
  - my-tool
required-env:
  - MY_TOOL_API_KEY
---

# My Tool Skill

This skill teaches you how to use the `my-tool` CLI.

## Authentication

Set your API key:

```bash
export MY_TOOL_API_KEY="your-key-here"
```

## Basic Usage

### List Items

```bash
my-tool list --format json
```

### Create Item

```bash
my-tool create --name "New Item" --type standard
```

## Error Handling

- **401 Unauthorized**: Check MY_TOOL_API_KEY is set correctly
- **404 Not Found**: Verify the item ID exists
- **429 Rate Limited**: Wait 60 seconds and retry
```

### Step 3: Add Scripts (Optional)

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# scripts/setup.sh
set -e

echo "Checking my-tool installation..."
if ! command -v my-tool &> /dev/null; then
    echo "Installing my-tool..."
    npm install -g my-tool
fi

echo "my-tool is ready!"
```

### Step 4: Verify the Skill Loads

Refresh the skills list to confirm your skill is discovered:

```
POST /api/skills/refresh
```

Or restart the agent and check:

```
GET /api/skills
```

Your skill should appear in the response with the name and description from your frontmatter.

---

## Best Practices

### Keep Instructions Concise

Skill content is injected into the agent's context window. Be thorough but not verbose:

```markdown
<!-- Concise and actionable -->
## Listing Files

```bash
ls -la           # All files, long format
ls -lh *.txt     # Text files with human-readable sizes
```
```

### Provide Runnable Examples

Show actual commands, not just descriptions:

```markdown
<!-- Good: runnable example -->
```bash
gh issue list --repo owner/repo --search "bug" --state open
```
```

### Declare Requirements in Frontmatter

Do not assume tools are installed. Use `required-bins` and `required-env` so the agent knows what is needed:

```yaml
---
name: docker-skill
description: "Manage Docker containers"
required-bins:
  - docker
  - docker-compose
required-os:
  - macos
  - linux
---
```

### Handle Errors

Document common errors and their solutions so the agent can self-diagnose:

```markdown
## Troubleshooting

### "Permission denied"
```bash
chmod +x script.sh
```

### "Command not found"
```bash
brew install my-tool  # macOS
apt install my-tool   # Linux
```
```

### Test Your Skills

1. Read your `SKILL.md` and follow the instructions manually
2. Verify all commands work as written
3. Check that the frontmatter parses correctly (restart the agent, then `GET /api/skills`)
4. If the skill has requirements, test on a clean environment

---

## API Reference Summary

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/api/skills` | GET | List all discovered skills with enabled state |
| `/api/skills/refresh` | POST | Re-scan skill directories and refresh the list |
| `/api/skills/:id` | PUT | Enable or disable a skill (persisted per-agent) |
| `/api/skills/:id/scan` | GET | Get the security scan report for a skill |
| `/api/skills/catalog` | GET | Browse the full skill catalog |
| `/api/skills/catalog/search` | GET | Search the catalog |
| `/api/skills/catalog/:slug` | GET | Get a catalog skill by slug |
| `/api/skills/catalog/refresh` | POST | Force-refresh the catalog cache |
| `/api/skills/catalog/install` | POST | Install a skill from the catalog |
| `/api/skills/catalog/uninstall` | POST | Uninstall a catalog skill |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/search` | GET | Search the remote marketplace |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/installed` | GET | List marketplace-installed skills |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/install` | POST | Install from marketplace (git or slug) |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/uninstall` | POST | Uninstall a marketplace skill |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/config` | GET | Check marketplace API key status |
| `/api/skills/marketplace/config` | PUT | Set the marketplace API key |

---

## Environment Variables

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `MILADY_SKILLS_CATALOG` | Override the catalog file path |
| `SKILLS_REGISTRY` | Marketplace registry URL (default: `https://clawhub.ai`) |
| `CLAWHUB_REGISTRY` | Alternative to `SKILLS_REGISTRY` |
| `SKILLS_MARKETPLACE_URL` | Alternative to `SKILLS_REGISTRY` |
| `SKILLSMP_API_KEY` | API key for the legacy SkillsMP marketplace |
| `MILADY_STATE_DIR` | Override the base state directory (default: `~/.milady`) |
| `BUNDLED_SKILLS_DIRS` | Set by runtime -- path to bundled skills |
| `WORKSPACE_SKILLS_DIR` | Set by runtime -- path to workspace skills |
| `EXTRA_SKILLS_DIRS` | Set by runtime -- comma-separated extra skill directories |
| `SKILLS_ALLOWLIST` | Set by runtime -- comma-separated allowed skill IDs |
| `SKILLS_DENYLIST` | Set by runtime -- comma-separated denied skill IDs |
