docs/apps/dashboard.md, before:

---
title: Web Dashboard
sidebarTitle: Dashboard
description: Navigate the Milaidy web dashboard to configure your agent, chat, manage knowledge, and access advanced settings.
---

The Milaidy web dashboard is the primary interface for interacting with your agent. It provides a full-featured control panel for chatting, configuring your agent's character, managing plugins, and monitoring runtime behavior.

## Accessing the Dashboard

The dashboard runs as a web application served by the Milaidy agent runtime.

| Method | Details |
|--------|---------|
| **Default URL** | `http://localhost:2138` |
| **CLI shortcut** | Run `milaidy dashboard` to open the dashboard in your default browser |
| **Desktop app** | The Electron desktop app embeds the dashboard directly (no browser required) |

On first launch you will see the **Onboarding Wizard**, which walks you through initial agent setup. If authentication is required you will see the **Pairing View** before reaching the main dashboard.

<Info>
The dashboard port defaults to `2138`. If this port is already in use, the runtime will log the actual port it binds to. Check the startup logs for the exact URL.
</Info>

## Dashboard Layout

The dashboard uses a tab-based navigation system. On the Chat tab, the layout includes a **Conversations Sidebar** on the left, the **Chat View** in the center, and an **Autonomous Panel** on the right. On mobile viewports (below 1024 px), the sidebar and autonomous panel collapse into overlay buttons.

A **Header** bar sits at the top of every page, and a **Terminal Panel** is available at the bottom. A **Command Palette** (Cmd/Ctrl+K in the desktop app) provides quick access to actions across the dashboard.

### Header Bar

The header displays across all tabs and includes:

- **Agent name** -- the name of the currently running agent, pulled from `agentStatus.agentName`.
- **Agent status indicator** -- a color-coded dot showing the agent's runtime state (see [Agent Status Indicator](#agent-status-indicator) below).
- **Wallet addresses** -- truncated EVM and Solana addresses with copy-to-clipboard functionality.
- **Cloud credits** -- if Milaidy Cloud is enabled, the header shows credit balance with color-coded thresholds (green for OK, yellow for low, red for critical), along with a top-up link.
- **Lifecycle controls** -- Pause/Resume and Restart buttons for the agent runtime. These are disabled during state transitions (starting, restarting).
- **Drop / Mint status** -- when a public mint is active and the user has not yet minted, a mint button appears.

### Responsive Design

The dashboard adapts to viewport width:

| Viewport | Behavior |
|----------|----------|
| **Desktop** (1024 px and above) | Full three-column layout: sidebar, chat, autonomous panel |
| **Tablet** (768-1023 px) | Sidebar and autonomous panel collapse to overlay toggles |
| **Mobile** (below 768 px) | Single-column layout; sidebar and panel open as full-screen overlays |

The `ConversationsSidebar` and `AutonomousPanel` components both accept a `mobile` prop that switches their rendering mode and adds a close button.

## Tabs

The navigation is organized into primary tabs and an Advanced group. Tabs are defined in `apps/app/src/navigation.ts` with the following structure:

| Tab Group | Tabs | URL Path |
|-----------|------|----------|
| **Chat** | chat | `/chat` |
| **Character** | character | `/character` |
| **Wallets** | wallets | `/wallets` |
| **Knowledge** | knowledge | `/knowledge` |
| **Social** | connectors | `/connectors` |
| **Apps** | apps | `/apps` |
| **Settings** | settings | `/settings` |
| **Advanced** | plugins, skills, actions, triggers, fine-tuning, trajectories, runtime, database, logs, security | Various |

Legacy paths are redirected automatically: `/game` maps to Apps, `/agent` to Character, `/inventory` to Wallets, `/features` to Plugins, `/admin` to Advanced, and `/config` to Settings.

### Chat

The default landing tab. The `ChatView` component provides the core messaging interface.

**Message Area**

Messages render through the `MessageContent` component, which supports:

- **Plain text** -- standard chat messages with line breaks preserved.
- **Inline plugin config** -- `[CONFIG:pluginId]` markers in agent responses render as interactive plugin configuration forms using `ConfigRenderer`.
- **UI Spec rendering** -- fenced JSON code blocks containing UiSpec objects render as interactive UI elements via `UiRenderer`.
- **Code blocks** -- syntax-highlighted fenced code blocks.
- **Streaming** -- agent responses stream in token-by-token with a visible typing indicator. The `chatFirstTokenReceived` flag tracks when the first token arrives.

**Input Area**

The chat input area sits at the bottom of the view:

- **Auto-resizing textarea** -- grows from 38 px to a maximum of 200 px as you type.
- **Image attachments** -- attach images via the file picker button, drag-and-drop onto the chat area, or paste from clipboard. Pending images display as thumbnails above the input.
- **File drops** -- drag and drop files into the chat area to share them with the agent. A visual drop zone indicator appears during drag.
- **Send / Stop** -- the send button submits the message; while the agent is responding, a stop button appears to cancel generation.

**Voice Chat**

Built-in voice chat powered by ElevenLabs or browser TTS/STT:

- Voice configuration loads automatically from the agent's config on mount.
- The `useVoiceChat` hook manages the microphone toggle, agent voice playback, and the speaking state that drives avatar lip-sync.
- Voice config changes in Settings or Character views are synchronized in real-time via a `milady:voice-config-updated` custom DOM event.

**VRM 3D Avatar**

A live 3D avatar rendered with Three.js and `@pixiv/three-vrm`:

- The avatar responds to conversation with idle animations and emotes.
- Select from 8 built-in VRM models via the `selectedVrmIndex` state.
- Toggle avatar visibility and agent voice mute via the two control buttons in the Autonomous Panel's Chat Controls section.

**Conversations Sidebar**

The `ConversationsSidebar` component manages multiple conversations:

- **Conversation list** -- sorted by most recently updated. Each entry shows the title, a relative timestamp (e.g., "5m ago", "2d ago"), and an unread indicator for conversations with new messages.
- **Create new** -- a "New Chat" button at the top creates a fresh conversation thread.
- **Rename** -- double-click a conversation title to enter inline edit mode. Press Enter to save or Escape to cancel.
- **Delete** -- each conversation has a delete button that removes the thread permanently.
- **Unread tracking** -- the `unreadConversations` set tracks which conversations have new messages the user has not yet viewed.

**Autonomous Panel**

Displayed on the right side of the Chat tab, the `AutonomousPanel` component provides real-time visibility into autonomous operations:

- **Current state** -- shows the latest "Thought" (from assistant/evaluator streams) and latest "Action" (from action/tool/provider streams).
- **Event Stream** -- a collapsible, reverse-chronological feed of the last 120 events, color-coded by type:

| Event Type | Color |
|------------|-------|
| Heartbeat events | Accent |
| Error events | Red (danger) |
| Action, tool, provider events | Green (success) |
| Assistant thoughts | Accent |
| Other events | Muted gray |

- **Workbench Tasks** -- active tasks the agent is working on, displayed as a checklist.
- **Triggers** -- scheduled triggers (interval, cron, one-time) with their type, enabled status, and run count.
- **Todos** -- task items tracked by the agent, displayed as a checklist.
- **Chat Controls** -- at the bottom, avatar visibility toggle and agent voice mute toggle, plus a VRM avatar preview window (260-420 px tall depending on viewport).

**Emote Picker**

Trigger VRM avatar emotes with the keyboard shortcut **Cmd+E** (macOS) or **Ctrl+E** (Windows/Linux). The picker provides 29 emotes across 6 categories:

| Category | Emotes |
|----------|--------|
| **Greeting** | Wave, Kiss |
| **Emotion** | Crying, Sorrow, Rude Gesture, Looking Around |
| **Dance** | Dance Happy, Dance Breaking, Dance Hip Hop, Dance Popping |
| **Combat** | Hook Punch, Punching, Firing Gun, Sword Swing, Chopping, Spell Cast, Range, Death |
| **Idle** | Idle, Talk, Squat, Fishing |
| **Movement** | Float, Jump, Flip, Run, Walk, Crawling, Fall |

Each emote is represented by a clickable icon button. Categories are displayed as filterable tabs within the picker.

**Context Menu**

Right-click messages to access a context menu for saving commands or performing custom actions.

### Character

Configure your agent's identity and personality. The view is organized into four sections:

1. **Identity & Personality** -- agent name, avatar selection, bio, adjectives, topics, and system prompt.
2. **Style** -- three-column style rule textareas for controlling how the agent communicates.
3. **Examples** -- collapsible chat examples and post examples to guide the agent's behavior.
4. **Voice** -- voice provider selection (ElevenLabs) and preview, with model configuration.

Changes are saved via a save bar at the bottom of the view.

### Wallets

Displays wallet balances and NFTs. Shows token holdings across multiple EVM chains (Ethereum, Base, Arbitrum, Optimism, Polygon) and Solana. Each chain is identified with a color-coded icon.

### Knowledge

Manage your agent's knowledge base:

- **Stats display** -- document count and fragment count.
- **Document upload** -- file picker and drag-and-drop support.
- **URL upload** -- paste a URL; YouTube URLs are auto-transcribed.
- **Search** -- full-text search across the knowledge base.
- **Document list** -- browse documents with delete functionality.
- **Document detail** -- view individual documents and their fragments.

### Social (Connectors)

Configure chat and social connector plugins. This is a filtered view of the Plugins system showing only connector-type plugins (e.g., Discord, Twitter, Telegram).

### Apps

A single-surface app browser with optional full-screen game mode. Browse and launch apps that integrate with your agent, including embedded game viewers.

### Settings

Unified scrollable preferences panel implemented in the `SettingsView` component. The view is organized into the following sections:

#### 1. Appearance

Theme picker with 6 built-in themes displayed as a button grid (3 columns on mobile, 6 on desktop):

| Theme | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| **milady** | Clean black & white |
| **qt3.14** | Soft pastels |
| **web2000** | Green hacker vibes |
| **programmer** | VS Code dark |
| **haxor** | Terminal green |
| **psycho** | Pure chaos |

The active theme is highlighted. Theme selection is persisted to local storage and applied immediately. See [Themes & Avatars](/guides/themes) for details.

#### 2. AI Model

Provider selection and model configuration via the `ProviderSwitcher` component. This section supports:

- **Milaidy Cloud** -- if cloud is enabled, shows connection status, credit balance (with low/critical thresholds), and a login/disconnect flow.
- **Local/third-party providers** -- toggle AI provider plugins (e.g., Anthropic, OpenAI) and configure their API keys and model settings.
- **Plugin config save** -- each provider plugin's settings can be saved independently.

#### 3. Wallet / RPC / Secrets

Embedded configuration view (`ConfigPageView` with `embedded` prop) for managing wallet addresses, RPC endpoint URLs, and secret values (API keys, tokens). This is the same configuration system available through the Config page, rendered inline within Settings.

#### 4. Media Generation

The `MediaSettingsSection` component provides provider selection for:

- **Image generation** -- select and configure image generation providers.
- **Video generation** -- select and configure video generation providers.
- **Audio generation** -- select and configure audio generation providers.
- **Vision** -- select and configure vision/image understanding providers.

#### 5. Speech (TTS / STT)

The `VoiceConfigView` component configures:

- **Text-to-Speech provider** -- ElevenLabs or browser-native TTS.
- **Speech-to-Text** -- transcription provider configuration.
- **Voice preview** -- test the selected voice configuration.

#### 6. Permissions & Capabilities

The `PermissionsSection` component manages system permission grants for native platforms (Electron desktop app). Controls access to features like file system, microphone, camera, and notifications.

#### 7. Software Updates

- **Current version** display.
- **Release channel** selection via radio buttons: Stable (recommended), Beta (preview), or Nightly (bleeding edge).
- **Check Now** button for manual update checks.
- **Update available** banner showing current and latest version with instructions to run `milady update`.
- **Last checked** timestamp.

#### 8. Chrome Extension

- **Relay server status** -- shows whether the WebSocket relay at `ws://127.0.0.1:{port}/extension` is reachable, with a green/red indicator.
- **Check Connection** button to re-test relay status.
- **Installation instructions** -- step-by-step guide to load the unpacked Chrome extension from `apps/chrome-extension/` in Developer mode.
- **Extension path** display when available.

#### 9. Agent Export / Import

- **Export** -- opens a modal that estimates export size (memories, entities, rooms, worlds, tasks), requires an encryption password (minimum 4 characters), and optionally includes logs. Downloads as a single encrypted file.
- **Import** -- opens a modal to select an `.eliza-agent` file and enter the decryption password used during export.

<Warning>
Exports contain all agent data including secrets and relationships. The encryption password protects the file -- choose a strong password and store it securely.
</Warning>

#### 10. Danger Zone

Visually separated section with red-bordered cards for irreversible actions:

- **Export Private Keys** -- reveals EVM and Solana private keys with copy buttons. Keys are hidden by default and toggled on demand.
- **Reset Agent** -- wipes all config, memory, and data, returning the application to the onboarding wizard. This action is irreversible.

<Warning>
Never share your private keys with anyone. Resetting the agent permanently deletes all data -- there is no undo.
</Warning>

### Advanced Group

The Advanced section contains specialized sub-tabs, each accessible via a secondary tab bar:

| Sub-tab | Path | Description |
|---------|------|-------------|
| **Plugins** | `/plugins` | Feature and connector plugin management. Searchable/filterable cards with per-plugin settings and a UI Field Showcase reference plugin. |
| **Skills** | `/skills` | Custom agent skills configuration. |
| **Actions** | `/actions` | Custom agent actions -- create and edit custom action definitions. |
| **Triggers** | `/triggers` | Scheduled and event-based automation management. |
| **Fine-Tuning** | `/fine-tuning` | Dataset and model training workflows. |
| **Trajectories** | `/trajectories` | LLM call history viewer and analysis. Includes a detail view for individual trajectories. |
| **Runtime** | `/runtime` | Deep runtime object introspection and load order inspection. |
| **Databases** | `/database` | Browse database tables, media files, and vector stores. |
| **Logs** | `/logs` | Runtime and service log viewer. |
| **Security** | `/security` | Sandbox and policy audit feed. |

## Agent Status Indicator

The dashboard displays a color-coded agent status indicator in the header. The state is derived from `agentStatus.state`:

| Color | States | Meaning |
|-------|--------|---------|
| **Green** (`text-ok`) | `running` | Agent is running normally |
| **Yellow** (`text-warn`) | `paused`, `starting`, `restarting` | Agent is in a transitional state |
| **Red** (`text-danger`) | `error` | Agent has encountered an error |
| **Gray** (`text-muted`) | `stopped`, unknown, not connected | Agent status is unknown or not connected |

## Plugin Management

Plugins are managed through the **Plugins** sub-tab under Advanced and the **Social** tab for connector-type plugins:

- **Search and filter** -- plugins are displayed as searchable, filterable cards.
- **Enable/disable** -- toggle individual plugins on or off. Changes may require an agent restart.
- **Per-plugin settings** -- each plugin can expose its own configuration UI, rendered via `ConfigRenderer`.
- **Plugin types** -- plugins are categorized as "feature" or "connector" types. The Social tab shows only connectors.

## Action Notices

Transient toast notifications appear at the bottom of the screen for action confirmations, errors, and informational messages, color-coded by tone (success, error, or neutral).

## Restart Banner

When the agent needs a restart (for example, after configuration changes), a banner appears prompting you to restart. The banner uses the lifecycle control system, which tracks `lifecycleBusy` and `lifecycleAction` to prevent conflicting operations.

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/apps/dashboard.md, after:

---
title: Web Dashboard
sidebarTitle: Dashboard
description: Navigate the Milady web dashboard to configure your agent, chat, manage knowledge, and access advanced settings.
---

The Milady web dashboard is the primary interface for interacting with your agent. It provides a full-featured control panel for chatting, configuring your agent's character, managing plugins, and monitoring runtime behavior.

## Accessing the Dashboard

The dashboard runs as a web application served by the Milady agent runtime.

| Method | Details |
|--------|---------|
| **Default URL** | `http://localhost:2138` |
| **CLI shortcut** | Run `milady dashboard` to open the dashboard in your default browser |
| **Desktop app** | The Electron desktop app embeds the dashboard directly (no browser required) |

On first launch you will see the **Onboarding Wizard**, which walks you through initial agent setup. If authentication is required you will see the **Pairing View** before reaching the main dashboard.

<Info>
The dashboard port defaults to `2138`. If this port is already in use, the runtime will log the actual port it binds to. Check the startup logs for the exact URL.
</Info>

## Dashboard Layout

The dashboard uses a tab-based navigation system. On the Chat tab, the layout includes a **Conversations Sidebar** on the left, the **Chat View** in the center, and an **Autonomous Panel** on the right. On mobile viewports (below 1024 px), the sidebar and autonomous panel collapse into overlay buttons.

A **Header** bar sits at the top of every page, and a **Terminal Panel** is available at the bottom. A **Command Palette** (Cmd/Ctrl+K in the desktop app) provides quick access to actions across the dashboard.

### Header Bar

The header displays across all tabs and includes:

- **Agent name** -- the name of the currently running agent, pulled from `agentStatus.agentName`.
- **Agent status indicator** -- a color-coded dot showing the agent's runtime state (see [Agent Status Indicator](#agent-status-indicator) below).
- **Wallet addresses** -- truncated EVM and Solana addresses with copy-to-clipboard functionality.
- **Cloud credits** -- if Milady Cloud is enabled, the header shows credit balance with color-coded thresholds (green for OK, yellow for low, red for critical), along with a top-up link.
- **Lifecycle controls** -- Pause/Resume and Restart buttons for the agent runtime. These are disabled during state transitions (starting, restarting).
- **Drop / Mint status** -- when a public mint is active and the user has not yet minted, a mint button appears.

### Responsive Design

The dashboard adapts to viewport width:

| Viewport | Behavior |
|----------|----------|
| **Desktop** (1024 px and above) | Full three-column layout: sidebar, chat, autonomous panel |
| **Tablet** (768-1023 px) | Sidebar and autonomous panel collapse to overlay toggles |
| **Mobile** (below 768 px) | Single-column layout; sidebar and panel open as full-screen overlays |

The `ConversationsSidebar` and `AutonomousPanel` components both accept a `mobile` prop that switches their rendering mode and adds a close button.

## Tabs

The navigation is organized into primary tabs and an Advanced group. Tabs are defined in `apps/app/src/navigation.ts` with the following structure:

| Tab Group | Tabs | URL Path |
|-----------|------|----------|
| **Chat** | chat | `/chat` |
| **Character** | character | `/character` |
| **Wallets** | wallets | `/wallets` |
| **Knowledge** | knowledge | `/knowledge` |
| **Social** | connectors | `/connectors` |
| **Apps** | apps | `/apps` |
| **Settings** | settings | `/settings` |
| **Advanced** | plugins, skills, actions, triggers, fine-tuning, trajectories, runtime, database, logs, security | Various |

Legacy paths are redirected automatically: `/game` maps to Apps, `/agent` to Character, `/inventory` to Wallets, `/features` to Plugins, `/admin` to Advanced, and `/config` to Settings.

### Chat

The default landing tab. The `ChatView` component provides the core messaging interface.

**Message Area**

Messages render through the `MessageContent` component, which supports:

- **Plain text** -- standard chat messages with line breaks preserved.
- **Inline plugin config** -- `[CONFIG:pluginId]` markers in agent responses render as interactive plugin configuration forms using `ConfigRenderer`.
- **UI Spec rendering** -- fenced JSON code blocks containing UiSpec objects render as interactive UI elements via `UiRenderer`.
- **Code blocks** -- syntax-highlighted fenced code blocks.
- **Streaming** -- agent responses stream in token-by-token with a visible typing indicator. The `chatFirstTokenReceived` flag tracks when the first token arrives.

**Input Area**

The chat input area sits at the bottom of the view:

- **Auto-resizing textarea** -- grows from 38 px to a maximum of 200 px as you type.
- **Image attachments** -- attach images via the file picker button, drag-and-drop onto the chat area, or paste from clipboard. Pending images display as thumbnails above the input.
- **File drops** -- drag and drop files into the chat area to share them with the agent. A visual drop zone indicator appears during drag.
- **Send / Stop** -- the send button submits the message; while the agent is responding, a stop button appears to cancel generation.

**Voice Chat**

Built-in voice chat powered by ElevenLabs or browser TTS/STT:

- Voice configuration loads automatically from the agent's config on mount.
- The `useVoiceChat` hook manages the microphone toggle, agent voice playback, and the speaking state that drives avatar lip-sync.
- Voice config changes in Settings or Character views are synchronized in real-time via a `milady:voice-config-updated` custom DOM event.

**VRM 3D Avatar**

A live 3D avatar rendered with Three.js and `@pixiv/three-vrm`:

- The avatar responds to conversation with idle animations and emotes.
- Select from 8 built-in VRM models via the `selectedVrmIndex` state.
- Toggle avatar visibility and agent voice mute via the two control buttons in the Autonomous Panel's Chat Controls section.

**Conversations Sidebar**

The `ConversationsSidebar` component manages multiple conversations:

- **Conversation list** -- sorted by most recently updated. Each entry shows the title, a relative timestamp (e.g., "5m ago", "2d ago"), and an unread indicator for conversations with new messages.
- **Create new** -- a "New Chat" button at the top creates a fresh conversation thread.
- **Rename** -- double-click a conversation title to enter inline edit mode. Press Enter to save or Escape to cancel.
- **Delete** -- each conversation has a delete button that removes the thread permanently.
- **Unread tracking** -- the `unreadConversations` set tracks which conversations have new messages the user has not yet viewed.

**Autonomous Panel**

Displayed on the right side of the Chat tab, the `AutonomousPanel` component provides real-time visibility into autonomous operations:

- **Current state** -- shows the latest "Thought" (from assistant/evaluator streams) and latest "Action" (from action/tool/provider streams).
- **Event Stream** -- a collapsible, reverse-chronological feed of the last 120 events, color-coded by type:

| Event Type | Color |
|------------|-------|
| Heartbeat events | Accent |
| Error events | Red (danger) |
| Action, tool, provider events | Green (success) |
| Assistant thoughts | Accent |
| Other events | Muted gray |

- **Workbench Tasks** -- active tasks the agent is working on, displayed as a checklist.
- **Triggers** -- scheduled triggers (interval, cron, one-time) with their type, enabled status, and run count.
- **Todos** -- task items tracked by the agent, displayed as a checklist.
- **Chat Controls** -- at the bottom, avatar visibility toggle and agent voice mute toggle, plus a VRM avatar preview window (260-420 px tall depending on viewport).

**Emote Picker**

Trigger VRM avatar emotes with the keyboard shortcut **Cmd+E** (macOS) or **Ctrl+E** (Windows/Linux). The picker provides 29 emotes across 6 categories:

| Category | Emotes |
|----------|--------|
| **Greeting** | Wave, Kiss |
| **Emotion** | Crying, Sorrow, Rude Gesture, Looking Around |
| **Dance** | Dance Happy, Dance Breaking, Dance Hip Hop, Dance Popping |
| **Combat** | Hook Punch, Punching, Firing Gun, Sword Swing, Chopping, Spell Cast, Range, Death |
| **Idle** | Idle, Talk, Squat, Fishing |
| **Movement** | Float, Jump, Flip, Run, Walk, Crawling, Fall |

Each emote is represented by a clickable icon button. Categories are displayed as filterable tabs within the picker.

**Context Menu**

Right-click messages to access a context menu for saving commands or performing custom actions.

### Character

Configure your agent's identity and personality. The view is organized into four sections:

1. **Identity & Personality** -- agent name, avatar selection, bio, adjectives, topics, and system prompt.
2. **Style** -- three-column style rule textareas for controlling how the agent communicates.
3. **Examples** -- collapsible chat examples and post examples to guide the agent's behavior.
4. **Voice** -- voice provider selection (ElevenLabs) and preview, with model configuration.

Changes are saved via a save bar at the bottom of the view.

### Wallets

Displays wallet balances and NFTs. Shows token holdings across multiple EVM chains (Ethereum, Base, Arbitrum, Optimism, Polygon) and Solana. Each chain is identified with a color-coded icon.

### Knowledge

Manage your agent's knowledge base:

- **Stats display** -- document count and fragment count.
- **Document upload** -- file picker and drag-and-drop support.
- **URL upload** -- paste a URL; YouTube URLs are auto-transcribed.
- **Search** -- full-text search across the knowledge base.
- **Document list** -- browse documents with delete functionality.
- **Document detail** -- view individual documents and their fragments.

### Social (Connectors)

Configure chat and social connector plugins. This is a filtered view of the Plugins system showing only connector-type plugins (e.g., Discord, Twitter, Telegram).

### Apps

A single-surface app browser with optional full-screen game mode. Browse and launch apps that integrate with your agent, including embedded game viewers.

### Settings

Unified scrollable preferences panel implemented in the `SettingsView` component. The view is organized into the following sections:

#### 1. Appearance

Theme picker with 6 built-in themes displayed as a button grid (3 columns on mobile, 6 on desktop):

| Theme | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| **milady** | Clean black & white |
| **qt3.14** | Soft pastels |
| **web2000** | Green hacker vibes |
| **programmer** | VS Code dark |
| **haxor** | Terminal green |
| **psycho** | Pure chaos |

The active theme is highlighted. Theme selection is persisted to local storage and applied immediately. See [Themes & Avatars](/guides/themes) for details.

#### 2. AI Model

Provider selection and model configuration via the `ProviderSwitcher` component. This section supports:

- **Milady Cloud** -- if cloud is enabled, shows connection status, credit balance (with low/critical thresholds), and a login/disconnect flow.
- **Local/third-party providers** -- toggle AI provider plugins (e.g., Anthropic, OpenAI) and configure their API keys and model settings.
- **Plugin config save** -- each provider plugin's settings can be saved independently.

#### 3. Wallet / RPC / Secrets

Embedded configuration view (`ConfigPageView` with `embedded` prop) for managing wallet addresses, RPC endpoint URLs, and secret values (API keys, tokens). This is the same configuration system available through the Config page, rendered inline within Settings.

#### 4. Media Generation

The `MediaSettingsSection` component provides provider selection for:

- **Image generation** -- select and configure image generation providers.
- **Video generation** -- select and configure video generation providers.
- **Audio generation** -- select and configure audio generation providers.
- **Vision** -- select and configure vision/image understanding providers.

#### 5. Speech (TTS / STT)

The `VoiceConfigView` component configures:

- **Text-to-Speech provider** -- ElevenLabs or browser-native TTS.
- **Speech-to-Text** -- transcription provider configuration.
- **Voice preview** -- test the selected voice configuration.

#### 6. Permissions & Capabilities

The `PermissionsSection` component manages system permission grants for native platforms (Electron desktop app). Controls access to features like file system, microphone, camera, and notifications.

#### 7. Software Updates

- **Current version** display.
- **Release channel** selection via radio buttons: Stable (recommended), Beta (preview), or Nightly (bleeding edge).
- **Check Now** button for manual update checks.
- **Update available** banner showing current and latest version with instructions to run `milady update`.
- **Last checked** timestamp.

#### 8. Chrome Extension

- **Relay server status** -- shows whether the WebSocket relay at `ws://127.0.0.1:{port}/extension` is reachable, with a green/red indicator.
- **Check Connection** button to re-test relay status.
- **Installation instructions** -- step-by-step guide to load the unpacked Chrome extension from `apps/chrome-extension/` in Developer mode.
- **Extension path** display when available.

#### 9. Agent Export / Import

- **Export** -- opens a modal that estimates export size (memories, entities, rooms, worlds, tasks), requires an encryption password (minimum 4 characters), and optionally includes logs. Downloads as a single encrypted file.
- **Import** -- opens a modal to select an `.eliza-agent` file and enter the decryption password used during export.

<Warning>
Exports contain all agent data including secrets and relationships. The encryption password protects the file -- choose a strong password and store it securely.
</Warning>

#### 10. Danger Zone

Visually separated section with red-bordered cards for irreversible actions:

- **Export Private Keys** -- reveals EVM and Solana private keys with copy buttons. Keys are hidden by default and toggled on demand.
- **Reset Agent** -- wipes all config, memory, and data, returning the application to the onboarding wizard. This action is irreversible.

<Warning>
Never share your private keys with anyone. Resetting the agent permanently deletes all data -- there is no undo.
</Warning>

### Advanced Group

The Advanced section contains specialized sub-tabs, each accessible via a secondary tab bar:

| Sub-tab | Path | Description |
|---------|------|-------------|
| **Plugins** | `/plugins` | Feature and connector plugin management. Searchable/filterable cards with per-plugin settings and a UI Field Showcase reference plugin. |
| **Skills** | `/skills` | Custom agent skills configuration. |
| **Actions** | `/actions` | Custom agent actions -- create and edit custom action definitions. |
| **Triggers** | `/triggers` | Scheduled and event-based automation management. |
| **Fine-Tuning** | `/fine-tuning` | Dataset and model training workflows. |
| **Trajectories** | `/trajectories` | LLM call history viewer and analysis. Includes a detail view for individual trajectories. |
| **Runtime** | `/runtime` | Deep runtime object introspection and load order inspection. |
| **Databases** | `/database` | Browse database tables, media files, and vector stores. |
| **Logs** | `/logs` | Runtime and service log viewer. |
| **Security** | `/security` | Sandbox and policy audit feed. |

## Agent Status Indicator

The dashboard displays a color-coded agent status indicator in the header. The state is derived from `agentStatus.state`:

| Color | States | Meaning |
|-------|--------|---------|
| **Green** (`text-ok`) | `running` | Agent is running normally |
| **Yellow** (`text-warn`) | `paused`, `starting`, `restarting` | Agent is in a transitional state |
| **Red** (`text-danger`) | `error` | Agent has encountered an error |
| **Gray** (`text-muted`) | `stopped`, unknown, not connected | Agent status is unknown or not connected |

## Plugin Management

Plugins are managed through the **Plugins** sub-tab under Advanced and the **Social** tab for connector-type plugins:

- **Search and filter** -- plugins are displayed as searchable, filterable cards.
- **Enable/disable** -- toggle individual plugins on or off. Changes may require an agent restart.
- **Per-plugin settings** -- each plugin can expose its own configuration UI, rendered via `ConfigRenderer`.
- **Plugin types** -- plugins are categorized as "feature" or "connector" types. The Social tab shows only connectors.

## Action Notices

Transient toast notifications appear at the bottom of the screen for action confirmations, errors, and informational messages, color-coded by tone (success, error, or neutral).

## Restart Banner

When the agent needs a restart (for example, after configuration changes), a banner appears prompting you to restart. The banner uses the lifecycle control system, which tracks `lifecycleBusy` and `lifecycleAction` to prevent conflicting operations.
