docs/apps/tui.md, before:

---
title: "Terminal UI (TUI)"
sidebarTitle: "TUI"
description: "Interact with your Milaidy agent from the terminal using the keyboard-driven text interface and chat commands."
---

<Warning>
The TUI is under active development and may be disabled in current builds. The `launchTUI()` function currently throws `"TUI is disabled."` when called. The documentation below is retained for reference and will apply once the TUI is re-enabled.
</Warning>

The Milaidy TUI is a terminal-based interface for chatting with your agent and managing the runtime without opening a browser or desktop app. It renders directly in your terminal emulator using a full-screen layout with a conversation list, active chat view, and status bar. All interaction is keyboard-driven, making it well-suited to headless servers, SSH sessions, and power-user workflows.

The TUI connects to the same local API server as the web dashboard (default port `2138`). It can be launched alongside the dashboard or as the sole interface when running in a headless environment.

## Features

- Full-screen terminal layout with split conversation list and chat pane
- Real-time streaming of agent responses as they are generated
- Keyboard shortcuts for all core actions — no mouse required
- Slash commands (e.g., `/clear`, `/status`, `/restart`) for runtime control from the chat input
- Markdown rendering for agent responses — bold, italic, code blocks, and lists are rendered inline
- Conversation history navigation with search
- Status bar showing agent state, model, and token usage

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `Tab` / `Shift+Tab` | Move focus between conversation list and chat pane |
| `↑` / `↓` | Navigate conversations or scroll chat history |
| `Enter` | Open selected conversation / send message |
| `Ctrl+N` | Start a new conversation |
| `Ctrl+D` | Delete selected conversation |
| `Ctrl+L` | Clear the current chat view |
| `Ctrl+R` | Restart the embedded agent |
| `Ctrl+Q` | Quit the TUI |
| `Esc` | Cancel current input / close overlay |

## Configuration

Launch the TUI with the `milaidy tui` command. The `--port` flag overrides the default API port if the agent is running on a non-standard port.

```bash
# Start the TUI connected to the default local agent
milaidy tui

# Connect to an agent running on a custom port
milaidy tui --port 3000

# Connect to a remote agent
milaidy tui --api-base http://192.168.1.100:2138
```

**Slash commands** (typed directly in the chat input):

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `/clear` | Clear the current conversation |
| `/status` | Print current agent status and runtime info |
| `/restart` | Trigger an agent restart via the API |
| `/model <name>` | Switch the active model for this conversation |
| `/help` | List all available slash commands |

## Related

- [CLI Reference](/cli/overview) — full list of `milaidy` CLI commands including `tui`
- [Web Dashboard](/apps/dashboard) — browser-based alternative to the TUI
- [Desktop App](/apps/desktop) — Electron app with embedded terminal panel

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/apps/tui.md, after:

---
title: "Terminal UI (TUI)"
sidebarTitle: "TUI"
description: "Interact with your Milady agent from the terminal using the keyboard-driven text interface and chat commands."
---

<Warning>
The TUI is under active development and may be disabled in current builds. The `launchTUI()` function currently throws `"TUI is disabled."` when called. The documentation below is retained for reference and will apply once the TUI is re-enabled.
</Warning>

The Milady TUI is a terminal-based interface for chatting with your agent and managing the runtime without opening a browser or desktop app. It renders directly in your terminal emulator using a full-screen layout with a conversation list, active chat view, and status bar. All interaction is keyboard-driven, making it well-suited to headless servers, SSH sessions, and power-user workflows.

The TUI connects to the same local API server as the web dashboard (default port `2138`). It can be launched alongside the dashboard or as the sole interface when running in a headless environment.

## Features

- Full-screen terminal layout with split conversation list and chat pane
- Real-time streaming of agent responses as they are generated
- Keyboard shortcuts for all core actions — no mouse required
- Slash commands (e.g., `/clear`, `/status`, `/restart`) for runtime control from the chat input
- Markdown rendering for agent responses — bold, italic, code blocks, and lists are rendered inline
- Conversation history navigation with search
- Status bar showing agent state, model, and token usage

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `Tab` / `Shift+Tab` | Move focus between conversation list and chat pane |
| `↑` / `↓` | Navigate conversations or scroll chat history |
| `Enter` | Open selected conversation / send message |
| `Ctrl+N` | Start a new conversation |
| `Ctrl+D` | Delete selected conversation |
| `Ctrl+L` | Clear the current chat view |
| `Ctrl+R` | Restart the embedded agent |
| `Ctrl+Q` | Quit the TUI |
| `Esc` | Cancel current input / close overlay |

## Configuration

Launch the TUI with the `milady tui` command. The `--port` flag overrides the default API port if the agent is running on a non-standard port.

```bash
# Start the TUI connected to the default local agent
milady tui

# Connect to an agent running on a custom port
milady tui --port 3000

# Connect to a remote agent
milady tui --api-base http://192.168.1.100:2138
```

**Slash commands** (typed directly in the chat input):

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `/clear` | Clear the current conversation |
| `/status` | Print current agent status and runtime info |
| `/restart` | Trigger an agent restart via the API |
| `/model <name>` | Switch the active model for this conversation |
| `/help` | List all available slash commands |

## Related

- [CLI Reference](/cli/overview) — full list of `milady` CLI commands including `tui`
- [Web Dashboard](/apps/dashboard) — browser-based alternative to the TUI
- [Desktop App](/apps/desktop) — Electron app with embedded terminal panel
