docs/CORE_EJECT_PLAN.md, before:

# Eliza Core Eject System — Design Plan

## Problem

`@elizaos/core` is consumed as an npm package (`"next"` tag, currently `2.0.0-alpha.10`). The package ships dist-only (110K line bundle, no source). This means:

1. **milaidy cannot patch core bugs** without waiting for upstream releases
2. **milaidy cannot experiment** with runtime/memory/service changes
3. **The agent cannot modify its own framework** — a key goal for self-improving agents

## Solution: Core Source Eject

Similar to the plugin eject system (PR #300), add the ability to "eject" `@elizaos/core` (and potentially other `@elizaos/*` packages) from npm into a local source checkout that milaidy builds and loads instead.

## Architecture

### Directory Structure

```
~/.milady/
  core/                          # Ejected core lives here
    eliza/                       # Git clone of elizaos/eliza monorepo
      packages/
        core/                    # The actual @elizaos/core source
          src/
          dist/                  # Built output
          package.json
        ...                      # Other packages in the monorepo
      .git/
    .upstream.json               # Tracking metadata (same schema as plugin eject)
```

### Why Clone the Full Monorepo?

The `@elizaos/core` package lives in `packages/core/` within the `elizaos/eliza` monorepo. It has internal workspace dependencies (e.g., `@elizaos/plugin-bootstrap`, `@elizaos/service-interfaces`). Cloning just `packages/core/` would break the build. The full monorepo clone ensures:

- Build toolchain works (pnpm workspace, turbo)
- Internal deps resolve correctly
- We can eject other `@elizaos/*` packages later without re-cloning

### Loading Priority (Updated)

Current plugin loading priority in `resolvePlugins()`:
1. Ejected plugins (`~/.milady/plugins/ejected/`)
2. Official npm (with repair logic)
3. User-installed (`~/.milady/plugins/installed/`)
4. `@milaidy/plugin-*` local
5. npm fallback

For core, we need a **separate mechanism** — core isn't a "plugin", it's a dependency imported everywhere via `import { ... } from "@elizaos/core"`. Options:

#### Option A: TypeScript Path Mapping (Recommended)
Add a `paths` entry in `tsconfig.json` at build time:
```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "paths": {
      "@elizaos/core": ["~/.milady/core/eliza/packages/core/dist"]
    }
  }
}
```
Plus configure the bundler (`tsdown`) to resolve this alias. At runtime, the built milaidy bundle would import from the ejected core's dist instead of `node_modules`.

#### Option B: npm/bun Link
Run `bun link` or `npm link` to symlink the ejected core's built output into `node_modules/@elizaos/core`. Simpler but fragile (survives `bun install` poorly).

#### Option C: Package.json Overrides
Use bun's `overrides` or npm's `overrides` field:
```json
{
  "overrides": {
    "@elizaos/core": "file:../../.milady/core/eliza/packages/core"
  }
}
```
This is clean but modifies `package.json` in the repo.

**Recommendation: Option A** for build-time resolution (clean, no repo file changes needed beyond a generated tsconfig extends). **Option B as fallback** if the bundler doesn't cooperate.

### Implementation Plan

#### 1. `src/services/core-eject.ts` — Core eject service

Functions:
- **`ejectCore()`** — Clone `elizaos/eliza` monorepo, checkout correct branch/tag, install deps, build `packages/core`, create `.upstream.json`, configure path override
- **`syncCore()`** — `git fetch` + `git merge` on the ejected monorepo, rebuild, report conflicts
- **`reinjectCore()`** — Remove ejected core, restore npm resolution
- **`getCoreStatus()`** — Return current state (ejected vs npm, version, commit, pending changes)

Serialization: Same promise-chain pattern as `plugin-eject.ts`.

`.upstream.json` schema (reuse `milaidy-upstream-v1`):
```json
{
  "$schema": "milaidy-upstream-v1",
  "source": "github:elizaos/eliza",
  "gitUrl": "https://github.com/elizaos/eliza.git",
  "branch": "develop",
  "commitHash": "<sha>",
  "ejectedAt": "<iso>",
  "npmPackage": "@elizaos/core",
  "npmVersion": "2.0.0-alpha.10",
  "lastSyncAt": null,
  "localCommits": 0
}
```

#### 2. Build Integration

When ejected core exists:
- `scripts/run-node.mjs` (the build orchestrator) checks for `~/.milady/core/eliza/packages/core/dist/`
- If present, generates a `tsconfig.eject-overrides.json` that extends the main `tsconfig.json` with path mappings
- `tsdown` config reads from this override
- The built milaidy bundle imports from ejected core instead of npm

When not ejected:
- No override file exists, normal npm resolution

#### 3. Agent Actions

Add to `src/runtime/milaidy-plugin.ts`:
- `EJECT_CORE` — Triggers `ejectCore()` 
- `SYNC_CORE` — Triggers `syncCore()`
- `REINJECT_CORE` — Triggers `reinjectCore()`
- `CORE_STATUS` — Returns `getCoreStatus()`

#### 4. Runtime Detection

In `src/runtime/eliza.ts`, on startup:
- Check if ejected core exists at `~/.milady/core/eliza/packages/core/dist/`
- Log whether running from ejected source or npm
- Validate version compatibility (ejected core version vs expected)

#### 5. API Endpoint

`GET /api/core/status` — Returns ejection status, version info, local changes count.

### Build Considerations

The eliza monorepo uses:
- **pnpm** as package manager
- **turbo** for build orchestration  
- **tsup** for core package bundling

`ejectCore()` needs to:
1. `git clone --depth 50 --branch develop https://github.com/elizaos/eliza.git`
2. `cd eliza && pnpm install`
3. `cd packages/core && pnpm build` (or `turbo build --filter=@elizaos/core`)
4. Verify `packages/core/dist/` exists with valid exports

### Edge Cases

- **Version drift**: Ejected core is on `develop` (bleeding edge) while milaidy expects `2.0.0-alpha.10`. Type mismatches possible. Mitigation: `syncCore()` warns about breaking changes, user can pin to a tag.
- **Monorepo size**: Full clone is ~200MB+. Use `--depth 50` for shallow clone. `syncCore()` may need to unshallow.
- **Build failures**: Same pattern as plugin eject — `ejectCore()` cleans up on build failure, `syncCore()` returns structured error.
- **Multiple @elizaos packages**: If milaidy also imports `@elizaos/plugin-bootstrap` etc., those resolve from the monorepo too. Path mappings should cover all used `@elizaos/*` packages.

### Scope for v1

1. `ejectCore()` / `syncCore()` / `reinjectCore()` / `getCoreStatus()`
2. 4 agent actions
3. Build-time path override (tsconfig + tsdown config)
4. Startup detection + logging
5. API endpoint
6. Unit tests (same coverage target as plugin-eject: ~85%+)

### Out of Scope (v2)

- Ejecting other `@elizaos/*` packages individually (e.g., `@elizaos/plugin-bootstrap`)
- Auto-sync on upstream release
- Visual diff of local changes vs upstream
- PR generation from ejected changes

## Files to Create/Modify

**Create:**
- `src/services/core-eject.ts` — Main service (~400-600 lines)
- `src/services/core-eject.test.ts` — Unit tests (~400-500 lines)
- `src/actions/eject-core.ts` — Action wrapper
- `src/actions/sync-core.ts` — Action wrapper
- `src/actions/reinject-core.ts` — Action wrapper
- `src/actions/core-status.ts` — Action wrapper
- `docs/CORE_EJECT.md` — Dev docs (brief, not a stale plan)

**Modify:**
- `src/runtime/milaidy-plugin.ts` — Register 4 new actions
- `src/runtime/eliza.ts` — Startup detection of ejected core
- `src/api/server.ts` — `GET /api/core/status` endpoint
- `tsdown.config.ts` — Conditional path alias when ejected core detected
- `scripts/run-node.mjs` — Check for ejected core, generate override tsconfig if needed

## Implementation Notes for Codex

- Follow the same patterns as `src/services/plugin-eject.ts` (serialized ops, `.upstream.json`, error handling)
- Use `isWithinEjectedDir()` equivalent for path traversal protection
- The eliza monorepo remote is `https://github.com/elizaos/eliza.git`, branch `develop`
- `@elizaos/core` source is at `packages/core/` in the monorepo
- Build command for core: `pnpm --filter @elizaos/core build` (or `cd packages/core && pnpm build`)
- Install command: `pnpm install` (must be pnpm, not npm/bun — the monorepo uses pnpm workspaces)
- All commits need `Co-authored-by: Sol <sol@shad0w.xyz>` trailer
- Branch: `feat/core-eject-system` off `develop`
- Run `bunx tsc --noEmit` and `bunx biome check .` before finishing

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/CORE_EJECT_PLAN.md, after:

# Eliza Core Eject System — Design Plan

## Problem

`@elizaos/core` is consumed as an npm package (`"next"` tag, currently `2.0.0-alpha.10`). The package ships dist-only (110K line bundle, no source). This means:

1. **milady cannot patch core bugs** without waiting for upstream releases
2. **milady cannot experiment** with runtime/memory/service changes
3. **The agent cannot modify its own framework** — a key goal for self-improving agents

## Solution: Core Source Eject

Similar to the plugin eject system (PR #300), add the ability to "eject" `@elizaos/core` (and potentially other `@elizaos/*` packages) from npm into a local source checkout that milady builds and loads instead.

## Architecture

### Directory Structure

```
~/.milady/
  core/                          # Ejected core lives here
    eliza/                       # Git clone of elizaos/eliza monorepo
      packages/
        core/                    # The actual @elizaos/core source
          src/
          dist/                  # Built output
          package.json
        ...                      # Other packages in the monorepo
      .git/
    .upstream.json               # Tracking metadata (same schema as plugin eject)
```

### Why Clone the Full Monorepo?

The `@elizaos/core` package lives in `packages/core/` within the `elizaos/eliza` monorepo. It has internal workspace dependencies (e.g., `@elizaos/plugin-bootstrap`, `@elizaos/service-interfaces`). Cloning just `packages/core/` would break the build. The full monorepo clone ensures:

- Build toolchain works (pnpm workspace, turbo)
- Internal deps resolve correctly
- We can eject other `@elizaos/*` packages later without re-cloning

### Loading Priority (Updated)

Current plugin loading priority in `resolvePlugins()`:
1. Ejected plugins (`~/.milady/plugins/ejected/`)
2. Official npm (with repair logic)
3. User-installed (`~/.milady/plugins/installed/`)
4. `@milady/plugin-*` local
5. npm fallback

For core, we need a **separate mechanism** — core isn't a "plugin", it's a dependency imported everywhere via `import { ... } from "@elizaos/core"`. Options:

#### Option A: TypeScript Path Mapping (Recommended)
Add a `paths` entry in `tsconfig.json` at build time:
```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "paths": {
      "@elizaos/core": ["~/.milady/core/eliza/packages/core/dist"]
    }
  }
}
```
Plus configure the bundler (`tsdown`) to resolve this alias. At runtime, the built milady bundle would import from the ejected core's dist instead of `node_modules`.

#### Option B: npm/bun Link
Run `bun link` or `npm link` to symlink the ejected core's built output into `node_modules/@elizaos/core`. Simpler but fragile (survives `bun install` poorly).

#### Option C: Package.json Overrides
Use bun's `overrides` or npm's `overrides` field:
```json
{
  "overrides": {
    "@elizaos/core": "file:../../.milady/core/eliza/packages/core"
  }
}
```
This is clean but modifies `package.json` in the repo.

**Recommendation: Option A** for build-time resolution (clean, no repo file changes needed beyond a generated tsconfig extends). **Option B as fallback** if the bundler doesn't cooperate.

### Implementation Plan

#### 1. `src/services/core-eject.ts` — Core eject service

Functions:
- **`ejectCore()`** — Clone `elizaos/eliza` monorepo, checkout correct branch/tag, install deps, build `packages/core`, create `.upstream.json`, configure path override
- **`syncCore()`** — `git fetch` + `git merge` on the ejected monorepo, rebuild, report conflicts
- **`reinjectCore()`** — Remove ejected core, restore npm resolution
- **`getCoreStatus()`** — Return current state (ejected vs npm, version, commit, pending changes)

Serialization: Same promise-chain pattern as `plugin-eject.ts`.

`.upstream.json` schema (reuse `milaidy-upstream-v1`):
```json
{
  "$schema": "milaidy-upstream-v1",
  "source": "github:elizaos/eliza",
  "gitUrl": "https://github.com/elizaos/eliza.git",
  "branch": "develop",
  "commitHash": "<sha>",
  "ejectedAt": "<iso>",
  "npmPackage": "@elizaos/core",
  "npmVersion": "2.0.0-alpha.10",
  "lastSyncAt": null,
  "localCommits": 0
}
```

#### 2. Build Integration

When ejected core exists:
- `scripts/run-node.mjs` (the build orchestrator) checks for `~/.milady/core/eliza/packages/core/dist/`
- If present, generates a `tsconfig.eject-overrides.json` that extends the main `tsconfig.json` with path mappings
- `tsdown` config reads from this override
- The built milady bundle imports from ejected core instead of npm

When not ejected:
- No override file exists, normal npm resolution

#### 3. Agent Actions

Add to `src/runtime/milady-plugin.ts`:
- `EJECT_CORE` — Triggers `ejectCore()` 
- `SYNC_CORE` — Triggers `syncCore()`
- `REINJECT_CORE` — Triggers `reinjectCore()`
- `CORE_STATUS` — Returns `getCoreStatus()`

#### 4. Runtime Detection

In `src/runtime/eliza.ts`, on startup:
- Check if ejected core exists at `~/.milady/core/eliza/packages/core/dist/`
- Log whether running from ejected source or npm
- Validate version compatibility (ejected core version vs expected)

#### 5. API Endpoint

`GET /api/core/status` — Returns ejection status, version info, local changes count.

### Build Considerations

The eliza monorepo uses:
- **pnpm** as package manager
- **turbo** for build orchestration  
- **tsup** for core package bundling

`ejectCore()` needs to:
1. `git clone --depth 50 --branch develop https://github.com/elizaos/eliza.git`
2. `cd eliza && pnpm install`
3. `cd packages/core && pnpm build` (or `turbo build --filter=@elizaos/core`)
4. Verify `packages/core/dist/` exists with valid exports

### Edge Cases

- **Version drift**: Ejected core is on `develop` (bleeding edge) while milady expects `2.0.0-alpha.10`. Type mismatches possible. Mitigation: `syncCore()` warns about breaking changes, user can pin to a tag.
- **Monorepo size**: Full clone is ~200MB+. Use `--depth 50` for shallow clone. `syncCore()` may need to unshallow.
- **Build failures**: Same pattern as plugin eject — `ejectCore()` cleans up on build failure, `syncCore()` returns structured error.
- **Multiple @elizaos packages**: If milady also imports `@elizaos/plugin-bootstrap` etc., those resolve from the monorepo too. Path mappings should cover all used `@elizaos/*` packages.

### Scope for v1

1. `ejectCore()` / `syncCore()` / `reinjectCore()` / `getCoreStatus()`
2. 4 agent actions
3. Build-time path override (tsconfig + tsdown config)
4. Startup detection + logging
5. API endpoint
6. Unit tests (same coverage target as plugin-eject: ~85%+)

### Out of Scope (v2)

- Ejecting other `@elizaos/*` packages individually (e.g., `@elizaos/plugin-bootstrap`)
- Auto-sync on upstream release
- Visual diff of local changes vs upstream
- PR generation from ejected changes

## Files to Create/Modify

**Create:**
- `src/services/core-eject.ts` — Main service (~400-600 lines)
- `src/services/core-eject.test.ts` — Unit tests (~400-500 lines)
- `src/actions/eject-core.ts` — Action wrapper
- `src/actions/sync-core.ts` — Action wrapper
- `src/actions/reinject-core.ts` — Action wrapper
- `src/actions/core-status.ts` — Action wrapper
- `docs/CORE_EJECT.md` — Dev docs (brief, not a stale plan)

**Modify:**
- `src/runtime/milady-plugin.ts` — Register 4 new actions
- `src/runtime/eliza.ts` — Startup detection of ejected core
- `src/api/server.ts` — `GET /api/core/status` endpoint
- `tsdown.config.ts` — Conditional path alias when ejected core detected
- `scripts/run-node.mjs` — Check for ejected core, generate override tsconfig if needed

## Implementation Notes for Codex

- Follow the same patterns as `src/services/plugin-eject.ts` (serialized ops, `.upstream.json`, error handling)
- Use `isWithinEjectedDir()` equivalent for path traversal protection
- The eliza monorepo remote is `https://github.com/elizaos/eliza.git`, branch `develop`
- `@elizaos/core` source is at `packages/core/` in the monorepo
- Build command for core: `pnpm --filter @elizaos/core build` (or `cd packages/core && pnpm build`)
- Install command: `pnpm install` (must be pnpm, not npm/bun — the monorepo uses pnpm workspaces)
- All commits need `Co-authored-by: Sol <sol@shad0w.xyz>` trailer
- Branch: `feat/core-eject-system` off `develop`
- Run `bunx tsc --noEmit` and `bunx biome check .` before finishing
