docs/installation.mdx, before:

---
title: "Installation"
sidebarTitle: "Installation"
description: "Download the desktop app or install Milady via CLI on macOS, Windows, or Linux."
---

# Installation

## Desktop App (recommended)

Grab from **[Releases](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest)**:

| Platform | File | |
|----------|------|---|
| macOS (Apple Silicon) | [`Milady-arm64.dmg`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) | for your overpriced rectangle |
| macOS (Intel) | [`Milady-x64.dmg`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) | boomer mac |
| Windows | [`Milady-Setup.exe`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) | for the gamer anons |
| Linux | [`Milady.AppImage`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) / [`.deb`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) | I use arch btw |

Signed and notarized. No Gatekeeper FUD. We're legit.

### Verify (for the paranoid kings)

```bash
cd ~/Downloads
curl -fsSLO https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest/download/SHA256SUMS.txt
shasum -a 256 --check --ignore-missing SHA256SUMS.txt
```

## CLI Install

<Tabs>
  <Tab title="macOS / Linux">
    ```bash
    curl -fsSL https://milady-ai.github.io/milady/install.sh | bash
    milady setup
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Windows">
    ```powershell
    irm https://milady-ai.github.io/milady/install.ps1 | iex
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="npm">
    ```bash
    npm install -g milaidy
    milady setup
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Prerequisites

| | Version | Notes |
|---|---------|-------|
| **Node.js** | >= 22 | `node --version` to check |
| **bun** | latest | for building and running. `curl -fsSL https://bun.sh/install \| bash` |

## Build from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/milady-ai/milady.git
cd milady
bun install
bun run build
bun run milady start
```

> `scripts/rt.sh` prefers bun but falls back to npm automatically. If you want to be explicit: `bun run build:node` uses only Node.

Dev mode with hot reload:

```bash
bun run dev
```

## Security: API Token

The API server binds to `127.0.0.1` (loopback) by default — only you can reach it. If you expose it to the network (e.g. `MILADY_API_BIND=0.0.0.0` for container/cloud deployments), **set a token**:

```bash
echo "MILADY_API_TOKEN=$(openssl rand -hex 32)" >> .env
```

<Warning>
Without a token on a public bind, anyone who can reach the server gets full access to the dashboard, agent, and wallet endpoints.
</Warning>

Commit message:

docs: centralize naming to milaidy, fix pnpm→bun, rewrite contributing guide
- Rename all Milady→Milaidy, milady→milaidy, MILADY_→MILAIDY_ across 37 doc files
- Preserve GitHub/Discord URLs (milady-ai/milady, discord.gg/milady)
- Replace all pnpm references with bun equivalents
- Rewrite contributing guide to reflect agents-only review policy
- Update test expectations for new naming

docs/installation.mdx, after:

---
title: "Installation"
sidebarTitle: "Installation"
description: "Download the desktop app or install Milaidy via CLI on macOS, Windows, or Linux."
---

# Installation

## Desktop App (recommended)

Grab from **[Releases](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest)**:

| Platform | File | |
|----------|------|---|
| macOS (Apple Silicon) | [`Milaidy-arm64.dmg`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) | for your overpriced rectangle |
| macOS (Intel) | [`Milaidy-x64.dmg`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) | boomer mac |
| Windows | [`Milaidy-Setup.exe`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) | for the gamer anons |
| Linux | [`Milaidy.AppImage`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) / [`.deb`](https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest) | I use arch btw |

Signed and notarized. No Gatekeeper FUD. We're legit.

### Verify (for the paranoid kings)

```bash
cd ~/Downloads
curl -fsSLO https://github.com/milady-ai/milady/releases/latest/download/SHA256SUMS.txt
shasum -a 256 --check --ignore-missing SHA256SUMS.txt
```

## CLI Install

<Tabs>
  <Tab title="macOS / Linux">
    ```bash
    curl -fsSL https://milady-ai.github.io/milady/install.sh | bash
    milaidy setup
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Windows">
    ```powershell
    irm https://milady-ai.github.io/milady/install.ps1 | iex
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="npm">
    ```bash
    npm install -g milaidy
    milaidy setup
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Prerequisites

| | Version | Notes |
|---|---------|-------|
| **Node.js** | >= 22 | `node --version` to check |
| **bun** | latest | for building and running. `curl -fsSL https://bun.sh/install \| bash` |

## Build from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/milady-ai/milady.git
cd milady
bun install
bun run build
bun run milaidy start
```

> `scripts/rt.sh` prefers bun but falls back to npm automatically. If you want to be explicit: `bun run build:node` uses only Node.

Dev mode with hot reload:

```bash
bun run dev
```

## Security: API Token

The API server binds to `127.0.0.1` (loopback) by default — only you can reach it. If you expose it to the network (e.g. `MILAIDY_API_BIND=0.0.0.0` for container/cloud deployments), **set a token**:

```bash
echo "MILAIDY_API_TOKEN=$(openssl rand -hex 32)" >> .env
```

<Warning>
Without a token on a public bind, anyone who can reach the server gets full access to the dashboard, agent, and wallet endpoints.
</Warning>
