docs/plugin-registry/llm/openai.md, before:

---
title: "OpenAI Plugin"
sidebarTitle: "OpenAI"
description: "OpenAI model provider for Milaidy — GPT-4o, o1, o3, embeddings, image generation, and speech."
---

The OpenAI plugin connects Milaidy agents to OpenAI's API, providing access to GPT-4o, the o1/o3 reasoning model families, DALL-E image generation, and Whisper speech-to-text.

**Package:** `@elizaos/plugin-openai`

## Installation

```bash
milaidy plugins install openai
```

Or add to `milaidy.json`:

```json
{
  "plugins": {
    "allow": ["openai"]
  }
}
```

## Auto-Enable

The plugin auto-enables when `OPENAI_API_KEY` is present in the environment:

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...
```

## Configuration

| Environment Variable | Required | Description |
|---------------------|----------|-------------|
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | Yes | OpenAI API key from [platform.openai.com](https://platform.openai.com) |
| `OPENAI_API_URL` | No | Custom base URL (for Azure OpenAI or compatible APIs) |
| `OPENAI_ORG_ID` | No | Organization ID for usage tracking |
| `OPENAI_PROJECT_ID` | No | Project ID for quota management |

### milaidy.json Example

```json
{
  "auth": {
    "profiles": {
      "default": {
        "provider": "openai",
        "model": "gpt-4o"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Supported Models

### Text Generation

| Model | Context | Best For |
|-------|---------|---------|
| `gpt-4o` | 128k | Multimodal reasoning, default |
| `gpt-4o-mini` | 128k | Fast, cost-efficient tasks |
| `gpt-4-turbo` | 128k | High-quality generation |
| `gpt-3.5-turbo` | 16k | Simple tasks at low cost |

### Reasoning Models

| Model | Context | Best For |
|-------|---------|---------|
| `o1` | 200k | Deep reasoning tasks |
| `o1-mini` | 128k | Fast reasoning |
| `o3` | 200k | State-of-the-art reasoning |
| `o3-mini` | 200k | Efficient reasoning |
| `o4-mini` | 200k | Latest efficient reasoning |

### Other Capabilities

| Capability | Model |
|-----------|-------|
| Embeddings | `text-embedding-3-small`, `text-embedding-3-large` |
| Image generation | `dall-e-3`, `dall-e-2` |
| Speech-to-text | `whisper-1` |
| Text-to-speech | `tts-1`, `tts-1-hd` |
| Vision | `gpt-4o` (multimodal) |

## Model Type Mapping

| ElizaOS Model Type | OpenAI Model |
|-------------------|-------------|
| `TEXT_SMALL` | `gpt-4o-mini` |
| `TEXT_LARGE` | `gpt-4o` |
| `TEXT_REASONING_SMALL` | `o1-mini` |
| `TEXT_REASONING_LARGE` | `o1` |
| `TEXT_EMBEDDING` | `text-embedding-3-small` |
| `IMAGE` | `dall-e-3` |
| `TRANSCRIPTION` | `whisper-1` |
| `TEXT_TO_SPEECH` | `tts-1` |

## Features

- Streaming responses
- Function/tool calling
- Vision (image input with `gpt-4o`)
- Structured JSON output (`response_format: { type: "json_object" }`)
- Batch API support
- Token usage tracking

## Usage Example

```typescript
// In a plugin or action handler:
const response = await runtime.useModel("TEXT_LARGE", {
  prompt: "Explain quantum entanglement in simple terms.",
  maxTokens: 500,
  temperature: 0.7,
});
```

## Rate Limits and Pricing

Rate limits depend on your OpenAI usage tier. See [platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits) for current limits by tier.

Pricing: [openai.com/pricing](https://openai.com/pricing)

## Related

- [Anthropic Plugin](/plugin-registry/llm/anthropic) — Claude model family
- [OpenRouter Plugin](/plugin-registry/llm/openrouter) — Route between providers
- [Model Providers Guide](/model-providers) — Compare all providers

Commit message:

fix(docs): rename milaidy -> milady across all doc files
Correct product name (Milady, not Milaidy) and CLI binary name (milady)
throughout all 98 documentation files. Preserves npm package name
(milaidy) in install commands and milaidy-upstream-v1 schema name.
Fixes false statement about CLI binary in configuration.mdx.
Updates docs.json name field and test assertion.

docs/plugin-registry/llm/openai.md, after:

---
title: "OpenAI Plugin"
sidebarTitle: "OpenAI"
description: "OpenAI model provider for Milady — GPT-4o, o1, o3, embeddings, image generation, and speech."
---

The OpenAI plugin connects Milady agents to OpenAI's API, providing access to GPT-4o, the o1/o3 reasoning model families, DALL-E image generation, and Whisper speech-to-text.

**Package:** `@elizaos/plugin-openai`

## Installation

```bash
milady plugins install openai
```

Or add to `milady.json`:

```json
{
  "plugins": {
    "allow": ["openai"]
  }
}
```

## Auto-Enable

The plugin auto-enables when `OPENAI_API_KEY` is present in the environment:

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...
```

## Configuration

| Environment Variable | Required | Description |
|---------------------|----------|-------------|
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | Yes | OpenAI API key from [platform.openai.com](https://platform.openai.com) |
| `OPENAI_API_URL` | No | Custom base URL (for Azure OpenAI or compatible APIs) |
| `OPENAI_ORG_ID` | No | Organization ID for usage tracking |
| `OPENAI_PROJECT_ID` | No | Project ID for quota management |

### milady.json Example

```json
{
  "auth": {
    "profiles": {
      "default": {
        "provider": "openai",
        "model": "gpt-4o"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Supported Models

### Text Generation

| Model | Context | Best For |
|-------|---------|---------|
| `gpt-4o` | 128k | Multimodal reasoning, default |
| `gpt-4o-mini` | 128k | Fast, cost-efficient tasks |
| `gpt-4-turbo` | 128k | High-quality generation |
| `gpt-3.5-turbo` | 16k | Simple tasks at low cost |

### Reasoning Models

| Model | Context | Best For |
|-------|---------|---------|
| `o1` | 200k | Deep reasoning tasks |
| `o1-mini` | 128k | Fast reasoning |
| `o3` | 200k | State-of-the-art reasoning |
| `o3-mini` | 200k | Efficient reasoning |
| `o4-mini` | 200k | Latest efficient reasoning |

### Other Capabilities

| Capability | Model |
|-----------|-------|
| Embeddings | `text-embedding-3-small`, `text-embedding-3-large` |
| Image generation | `dall-e-3`, `dall-e-2` |
| Speech-to-text | `whisper-1` |
| Text-to-speech | `tts-1`, `tts-1-hd` |
| Vision | `gpt-4o` (multimodal) |

## Model Type Mapping

| ElizaOS Model Type | OpenAI Model |
|-------------------|-------------|
| `TEXT_SMALL` | `gpt-4o-mini` |
| `TEXT_LARGE` | `gpt-4o` |
| `TEXT_REASONING_SMALL` | `o1-mini` |
| `TEXT_REASONING_LARGE` | `o1` |
| `TEXT_EMBEDDING` | `text-embedding-3-small` |
| `IMAGE` | `dall-e-3` |
| `TRANSCRIPTION` | `whisper-1` |
| `TEXT_TO_SPEECH` | `tts-1` |

## Features

- Streaming responses
- Function/tool calling
- Vision (image input with `gpt-4o`)
- Structured JSON output (`response_format: { type: "json_object" }`)
- Batch API support
- Token usage tracking

## Usage Example

```typescript
// In a plugin or action handler:
const response = await runtime.useModel("TEXT_LARGE", {
  prompt: "Explain quantum entanglement in simple terms.",
  maxTokens: 500,
  temperature: 0.7,
});
```

## Rate Limits and Pricing

Rate limits depend on your OpenAI usage tier. See [platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits) for current limits by tier.

Pricing: [openai.com/pricing](https://openai.com/pricing)

## Related

- [Anthropic Plugin](/plugin-registry/llm/anthropic) — Claude model family
- [OpenRouter Plugin](/plugin-registry/llm/openrouter) — Route between providers
- [Model Providers Guide](/model-providers) — Compare all providers
